Word	Definition	Example
abase	lower; degrade; humiliate	Anna expected to have to curtsy to the King of Siam; when told to cast herself down on the ground before him, however she refused to abase herself.
abash	embarrass	He was not at all abashed by her open admiration.
abate	subside or moderate	Rather than leaving immediately, they waited for the storm to abate.
abbreviate	shorten	Because we were running out of time, the lecturer had to abbreviate her speech.
abdicate	renounce; give up	When Edward VII abdicated the British throne, he surprised the entire world.
aberrant	abnormal or deviant	Given the aberrant nature of the data, we came to doubt the validity of the entire experiment.
abet	assist, usually in doing something wrong	She was unwilling to abet him in the swindle he had planned.
abeyance	suspended action	The deal was held in abeyance until her arrival.
abject	wretched; lacking pride	On the streets of New York the homeless live in abject poverty, huddling in doorways to find shelter from the wind.
abjure	renounce upon oath	He abjured his allegiance to the king.
ablution	washing	His daily ablutions were accompanied by loud noises that he humorously labeled "Opera in the Bath".
abnegation	renunciation; self-sacrifice	Though Rudolph and Duchess Flavia loved one another, their love was doomed, for she had to wed the king; their act of abnegation was necessary to preserve the kingdom.
abominate	loathe; hate	Moses scolded the idol worshippers in the tribe because he abominated the custom.
abortive	unsuccessful; fruitless	We had to abandon our abortive attempts.
abrasive	rubbing away; tending to grind down	Just as abrasive cleaning powders can wear away a shiny finish, abrasive remarks can wear away a listener's patience.
abrogate	abolish	He intended to abrogate the decree issued by his predecessor.
abscond	depart secretly and hide	The teller absconded with the bonds and was not found.
absolute	complete; totally unlimited; certain	Although the King of Siam was an absolute monarch, he did not want to behead his unfaithful wife without absolute evidence of her infidelity.
absolve	pardon (an offense)	The father confessor absolved him of his sins.
abstain	refrain; withhold from participation	After considering the effect of alcohol on his athletic performance, he decided to abstain from drinking while he trained for the race.
abstract	theoretical; not concrete; non-representational	To him, hunger was an abstract concept; he had never missed a meal.
abusive	coarsely insulting; physically harmful	An abusive parent damages a child both mentally and physically.
abut	border upon; adjoin	Where our estates abut, we must build a fence.
abysmal	bottomless	His arrogance is exceeded only by his abysmal ignorance.
accede	agree	If I accede to this demand for blackmail, I am afraid that I will be the victim of future demands.
accelerate	move faster	In our science class, we learn how falling bodies accelerate.
accessible	easy to approach; obtainable	We asked our guide whether the ruins were accessible on foot.
accessory	additional object; useful but not essential thing	She bought an attractive handbag as an accessory for her dress.
acclimate	adjust to climate or environment	One of the difficulties of our present air age is the need of travellers to acclimate themselves to their new and often strange environments.
acclivity	sharp upslope of a hill	The car could not go up the acclivity in high gear.
accolade	award of merit	In Hollywood, an "Oscar" is the highest accolade.
accord	agreement	She was in complete accord with the verdict.
accost	approach and speak first to a person	When the two young men accosted me, I was frightened because I thought they were going to attack me.
accoutre	equip	The fisherman was accoutred with the best that the sporting goods store could supply
accretion	growth; increase	The accretion of wealth marked the family's rise in power.
accrue	come about by addition	You must pay the interest that has accrued on your debt as well as the principal sum.
acidulous	slightly sour; sharp; caustic	James was unpopular because of his sarcastic and acidulous remarks.
acme	peak; pinnacle; highest point	Welles's success in Citizen Kane marked the acme of his career as an actor; never again did he achieve such popular acclaim.
acquiesce	assent; agree passively	Although she appeared to acquiesce to her employer's suggestions, I could tell she had reservations about the changes he wanted made.
acquittal	deliverance from a charge	His acquittal by the jury surprised those who had thought him guilty.
acrid	sharp; bitterly pungent	The acrid odor of burnt gunpowder filled the room after the pistol had been fired.
acrimonious	stinging, caustic	His tendency to utter acrimonious remarks alienated his audience.
actuarial	calculating; pertaining to insurance statistics	According to recent actuarial tables, life expectancy is greater today than it was a century ago.
actuate	motivate	I fail to understand what actuated you to reply to this letter so nastily.
acuity	sharpness	In time his youthful acuity of vision failed him, and he needed glasses.
acumen	mental keenness	His business acumen helped him to succeed where others had failed.
adage	wise saying; proverb	There is much truth in the old adage about fools and their money.
adamant	hard, inflexible	He was adamant in his determination to punish the wrongdoer.
addendum	addition; appendix to book	Jane's editor approved her new comparative literature text but thought it would be even better with an addendum on recent developments in literary criticism.
addle	muddle; drive crazy	This idiotic plan is confusing enough to addle anyone.
adherent	supporter; follower	In the wake of the scandal, the senator's one-time adherent quietly deserted him.
adjunct	something attached to but holding an inferior position	I will entertain this concept as an adjunct to the main proposal.
adjuration	solemn urging	Her adjuration to tell the truth did not change the witnesses' testimony.
adjutant	staff officer assisting the commander; assistant	Though Wellington delegated many tasks to his chief adjutant, Lord Fitzroy Somerset, Somerset was in no doubt as to who made all major decisions.
admonish	warn; reprove	He admonished his listeners to change their wicked ways.
adorn	decorate	Wall paintings and carved statues adorned the temple.
adroit	skillful	His adroit handling of the delicate situation pleased his employers.
adulation	flattery; admiration	The rock star thrived on the adulation of his groupies and yes-men.
adulterate	make impure by mixing with baser substances	It is a crime to adulterate foods without informing the buyer.
advent	arrival	Most Americans were unaware of the advent of the Nuclear Age until the news of Hiroshima reached them.
adventitious	accidental; casual	He found this adventitious meeting with his friend extremely fortunate.
adversary	opponent; enemy	Batman struggled to save Gotham City from the machinations of his wicked adversary, the Joker.
adverse	unfavorable; hostile	adverse circumstances compelled him to close his business.
adversity	poverty, misfortune	We must learn to meet adversity gracefully.
advert	refer to	Since you advert to this matter so frequently, you must regard it as important.
advocate	urge; plead for	The abolitionists advocated freedom for the slaves.
aegis	shield; defense	Under the aegis of the Bill of Rights, we enjoy our most treasured freedoms.
affable	courteous	Although he held a position of responsibility, he was an affable individual and could be reached by anyone with a complaint.
affected	artificial; pretended	His affected mannerisms irritated may of us who had known him before his promotion.
affidavit	written statement made under oath	The court refused to accept his statement unless he presented it in the form of an affidavit.
affiliation	joining; associating with	His affiliation with the political party was of short duration for he soon disagreed with his colleagues.
affinity	kinship	She felt an affinity with all who suffered; their pains were her pains.
affirmation	positive assertion; confirmation; solemn pledge by one who refuses to take an oath	Despite Tom's affirmation of innocence, Aunt Polly still suspected he had eaten the pie.
affix	attach or add on; fasten	First the registrar had to affix his signature to the license; then he had to affix his official seal.
affluence	abundance; wealth	Foreigners are amazed by the affluence and luxury of the American way of life.
affront	insult; offend	Accustomed to being treated with respect, Miss Challoner was affronted by Vidal's offensive behavior.
agape	openmouthed	She stared, agape, at the many strange animals in the zoo.
agenda	items of business at a meeting	We had so much difficulty agreeing upon an agenda that there was very little time for the meeting.
agglomeration	collection; heap	It took weeks to assort the agglomeration of miscellaneous items she had collected on her trip.
aggrandize	increase or intensify; raise in power, wealth, rank or honor	The history of the past quarter century illustrates how a President may aggrandize his power to act aggressively in international affairs without considering the wishes of Congress.
aggregate	sum; total	The aggregate wealth of this country is staggering to the imagination.
aghast	horrified	He was aghast at the nerve of the speaker who had insulted his host.
agility	nimbleness	The agility of the acrobat amazed and thrilled the audience.
agitate	stir up; disturb	Her fiery remarks agitated the already angry mob.
agnostic	one who is skeptical of the existence of knowability of a god or any ultimate reality	The agnostic demanded proof before she would accept the statement of the minister.
agog	highly excited; intensely curious	We were all agog at the news that the celebrated movie star was giving up his career in order to enter a monastery.
agrarian	pertaining to land or its cultivation	As a result of its recent industrialization, the country is gradually losing its agrarian traditions.
alacrity	cheerful promptness	He demonstrated his eagerness to serve by his alacrity in executing the orders of his master.
alchemy	medieval chemistry	The changing of baser metals into gold was the goal of the students of alchemy.
alcove	nook; recess	Though their apartment lacked a full-scale dining room, an alcove adjacent to the living room made an adequate breakfast nook for the young couple.
alias	an assumed name	John Smith's alias was Bob Jones.
alienate	make hostile; separate	Her attempts to alienate the two friends failed because they had complete faith in each other.
alimentary	supplying nourishment	The alimentary canal in our bodies is so named because digestion of foods occurs there.
alimony	payments make to an ex-spouse after divorce	Because Tony had supported Tina through medical school, on their divorce he asked the court to award him a month in alimony.
allay	calm; pacify	The crew tried to allay the fears of the passengers by announcing that the fire had been controlled.
allege	state without proof	It is alleged that she had worked for the enemy.
allegory	story in which characters are used as symbols; fable	Pilgrim's Progress is an allegory of the temptations and victories of the human soul.
alleviate	relieve	This should alleviate the pain; if it does not, we shall have to use stronger drugs.
alliteration	repetition of beginning sound in poetry	"The furrow followed free" is an example of alliteration.
alloy	mixture as of metals	alloy of gold are used more frequently than the pure metal.
allude	refer indirectly	Try not to allude to this matter in his presence because the topic annoys him.
allure	entice; attract	allured by the song of the sirens, the helmsman steered the ship toward the reef.
allusion	indirect reference	the allusions to mythological characters in Milton's poems bewilder the reader who has not studied Latin.
alluvial	pertaining to soil deposits left by running water	The farmers found the alluvial deposits at the mouth of the river very fertile.
aloft	upward	The sailor climbed aloft into the rigging.
aloof	apart; reserved	Shy by nature, she remained aloof while all the rest conversed.
altercation	noisy quarrel	Throughout the altercation, not one sensible word was uttered.
altruistic	unselfishly generous; concerned for others	In providing tutorial assistance and college scholarships to hundreds of economically disadvantaged youths, Eugene Lang performed a truly altruistic deed.
amalgamate	combine; unite in one body	The unions will attempt to amalgamate their groups into one national body.
amass	collect	The miser's aim is to amass and hoard as much gold as possible.
amazon	female warrior	Ever since the days of Greek mythology we refer to strong and aggressive women as amazons.
ambidextrous	capable of using either hand with equal ease	A switch-hitter in baseball should be naturally ambidextrous.
ambience	environment; atmosphere	She went to the restaurant not for the food but for the ambience.
ambiguous	unclear or doubtful in meaning	His ambiguous instructions misled us; we did not know which road to take.
ambivalence	the state of having contradictory or conflicting emotional attitudes	Torn between loving her parents one minute and hating them the next, she was confused by the ambivalence of her feelings.
amble	moving at an easy pace	When she first mounted the horse, she was afraid to urge the animal to go faster than a gentle amble.
ambrosia	food of the gods	ambrosia was supposed to give immortality to any human who ate it.
ambulatory	able to walk	He was described as an ambulatory patient because he was not confined to his bed.
ameliorate	improve	Many social workers have attempted to ameliorate the conditions of people living in the slums.
amenable	readily managed; willing to be led	He was amenable to any suggestions that came from those he looked up to; he resented advice from his inferiors.
amend	correct; change, generally for the better	Hoping to amend his condition, he left Vietnam for the United States.
amenities	convenient features; courtesies In addition to the customary amenities for the business traveler -- fax machines, modems, a health club --	the hotel offers the services of a butler versed in social amenities.
amiable	agreeable; lovable	His amiable disposition pleased all who had dealings with him.
amicable	friendly	The dispute was settled in an amicable manner with no harsh words.
amiss	wrong; faulty	Seeing her frown, he wondered if anything were amiss.
amity	friendship	Student exchange programs such as the Experiment in International Living were established to promote international amity.
amnesia	loss of memory	Because she was suffering from amnesia, the police could not get the young girl to identify herself.
amnesty	pardon	When his first child was born, the king granted amnesty to all in prison.
amok	in a state of rage	The police had to be called in to restrain him after he ran amok in the department store.
amoral	non-moral	The amoral individual lacks a code of ethics; he should not be classified as immoral.
amorous	moved by sexual love; loving	Don Juan was known for his amorous adventures.
amorphous	shapeless; vague; indeterminate	John was subject to panic attacks that left him prey to vague, amorphous fears: he knew he was terrified, but could neither define nor explain the cause of his terror.
amphibian	able to live both on land and in water	Frogs are classified as amphibian.
amphitheater	oval building with tiers of seats	The spectators in the amphitheater cheered the gladiators.
ample	abundant	He had ample opportunity to dispose of his loot before his police caught up with him.
amplify	enlarge	Her attempts to amplify her remarks were drowned out by the jeers of the audience.
amputate	cut off part of body; prune	When the doctors had to amputate Ted Kennedy's leg to prevent the spread of cancer, he did not let the loss of his leg keep him from participating in sports.
amulet	charm; talisman	Around her neck she wore the amulet that the witch doctor had given her.
anachronism	something or someone misplaced in time	Shakespeare's reference to clocks in Julius Caesar is an anachronism; no clocks existed in Caesar's time.
analgesic	causing insensitivity to pain	The analgesic qualities of his lotion will provide temporary relief.
analogous	comparable	She called our attention to the things that had been done in an analogous situation and recommended that we do the same.
analogy	similarity; parallelism	Your analogy is not a good one because the two situations are not similar.
anarchist	person who rebels against the established order	Only the total overthrow of all governmental regulations would satisfy the anarchist.
anarchy	absence of governing body; state of disorder	The assassination of the leaders led to a period of anarchy.
anathema	solemn curse; someone or something that is despised	He heaped anathema upon his foe.
anathematize	curse	The high priest anathematized the heretic.
anchor	secure or fasten firmly; be fixed in place	We set the post in concrete to anchor it in place.
ancillary	serving as an aid or accessory; auxiliary	In an ancillary capacity Doctor Watson was helpful; however, Holmes could not trust the good doctor to solve a perplexing case on his own.
anecdote	short account of an amusing or interesting event	Rather than make concrete proposals for welfare reform, President Raegan told anecdotes about poor people who became wealthy despite their impoverished backgrounds.
anemia	condition in which blood lacks red corpuscles	The doctor ascribes her tiredness to anemia.
anesthetic	substance that removes sensation with or without loss of consciousness	His monotonous voice acted like an anesthetic; his audience was soon asleep.
anguish	acute pain; extreme suffering	Visiting the site of explosion, Premier Gorbachev wept to see the anguish of the victims and their families.
angular	sharp-cornered; stiff in manner	His features, though angular, were curiously attractive.
animadversion	critical remark	He resented the animadversions of his critics, particularly because he realized they were true.
animated	lively	Her animated expression indicated a keenness of intellect.
animosity	active enmity	He incurred the animosity of the ruling class because he advocated limitations of their power.
animus	hostile feeling or intent	The animus of the speaker became obvious to all when he began to indulge in sarcastic and insulting remarks.
annals	records; history	In the annals of this period, we find no mention of democratic movements.
anneal	reduce brittleness and improve toughness by heating and cooling	After the glass is annealed, it will be less subject to chipping and cracking.
annihilate	destroy	The enemy in its revenge tried to annihilate the entire population.
annotate	comment; make explanatory notes	In the appendix to the novel, the critic sought to annotate many of the more esoteric references.
annuity	yearly allowance	The annuity he set up with the insurance company supplements his social security benefits so that he can live very comfortably without working.
annul	make void	The parents of the eloped couple tried to annul the marriage.
anodyne	drug that relieves pain; opiate	His pain was so great that no anodyne could relieve it.
anoint	consecrate	The prophet Samuel anointed David with oil, crowning him king of Israel.
anomalous	abnormal; irregular	He was placed in the anomalous position of seeming to approve procedures that he despised.
anomaly	irregularity	A bird that cannot fly is an anomaly.
anonymity	state of being nameless; anonymousness The donor of the gift asked the college not to mention him by name; the dean readily agreed to respect his	anonymity.
antagonistic	hostile; opposed	Despite his lawyers' best efforts to stop him, the angry prisoner continued to make antagonistic remarks to the judge.
antecede	precede	The invention of the radiotelegraph anteceded the development of television by a quarter of a century.
antecedents	preceding events or circumstances that influence what comes later; early life; ancestors	Before giving permission for Drummie to marry Estella, Miss Havisham had a few questions about the young man's birth and antecedents.
antediluvian	antiquated; ancient	The antediluvian customs had apparently not changed for thousands of years.
anthropoid	manlike	The gorilla is the strongest of the anthropoid animals.
anthropologist	student of the history and science of humankind	Anthropologists have discovered several relics of prehistoric humans in this area.
anthropomorphic	having human form or characteristics	Primitive religions often have deities with anthropomorphic characteristics.
anticlimax	letdown in thought or emotion	After the fine performance in the first act, the rest of the play was an anticlimax.
antipathy	aversion; dislike	His extreme antipathy to dispute caused him to avoid argumentative discussions with his friends.
antiquated	obsolete; outdated	Accustomed to editing his papers on word processors, Philip thought typewriters were too antiquated for him to use.
antiseptic	substance that prevents infection	It is advisable to apply an antiseptic to any wound, no matter how slight or insignificant.
antithesis	contrast; direct opposite of or to	This tyranny was the antithesis of all that he had hoped for, and he fought it with all his strength.
anvil	iron block used in hammering out metals	After heating the iron horseshoe in the forge, the blacksmith picked it up with his tongs and set it on the anvil.
apathetic	indifferent	He felt apathetic about the conditions he had observed and did not care to fight against them.
apathy	lack of caring; indifference	A firm believer in democratic government, she could not understand the apathy of people who never bothered to vote.
ape	imitate or mimic	He was suspended for a week because he had aped the principal in front of the whole school.
aperture	opening; hole	She discovered a small aperture in the wall, through which the insects had entered the room.
apex	tip; summit; climax	He was at the apex of his career.
aphasia	loss of speech due to injury or illness	After the automobile accident, the victim had periods of aphasia when he could not speak at all or could only mumble incoherently.
aphorism	pithy maxim	An aphorism differs from an adage in that it is more philosophical or scientific.
apiary	a place where bees are kept	Although he spent many hours daily in the apiary, he was very seldom stung by a bee.
aplomb	poise; composure	Wellington's nonchalance and aplomb in the heat of battle always heartened his followers.
apocalyptic	prophetic; pertaining to revelations; especially of disaster	His apocalyptic remarks were dismissed by his audience as wild surmises.
apocryphal	untrue; made up	To impress his friends, Tom invented apocryphal tales of his adventures in the big city.
apogee	highest point	When the moon in its orbit is furthest away from the earth, it is at its apogee.
apoplexy	stroke; loss of consciousness followed by paralysis	He was crippled by an attack of apoplexy.
apostate	one who abandons his religious faith or political beliefs	Because he switched from one party to another, his former friends shunned him as an apostate.
apothecary	druggist	In Holland, apothecaries still sell spices as well as ointments and pills.
apothegm	pithy, compact saying	Proverbs are apothegms that have become familiar sayings.
apotheosis	deification; glorification	The Roman empress Livia envied the late emperor his apotheosis; she hoped that on her death she, too, would be exalted to the rank of a god.
appal	dismay; shock	We were appalled by the horrifying conditions in the city's jails.
apparition	ghost; phantom	Hamlet was uncertain about the identity of the apparition that had appeared and spoken to him.
appease	pacify; soothe	We have discovered that, when we try to appease our enemies, we encourage them to make additional demands.
appellation	name; title	He was amazed when the witches hailed him with his correct appellation.
append	attach	I shall append this chart to my report.
application	diligent attention; (secondary meaning) apply	Pleased with how well Tom had whitewashed the fence, Aunt Polly praised him for his application.
apposite	appropriate; fitting	He was always able to find the apposite phrase, the correct expression for every occasion.
appraise	estimate the value of	It is difficult to appraise old paintings; it is easier to call them priceless.
appreciate	be thankful for; increase in worth; be thoroughly conscious of	Little Orphan Annie truly appreciated the stocks Daddy Warbucks ave her, whose value appreciated considerably over the years.
apprehend	arrest ( a criminal); dread; perceive	The police will apprehend the culprit and convict him before long.
apprehensive	fearful; discerning	His apprehensive glances at the people who were walking in the street revealed his nervousness.
apprise	inform	When he was apprised of the dangerous weather conditions, he decided to postpone his trip.
approbation	approval	Wanting her parents' regard, she looked for some sign of their approbation.
appropriate	acquire; take possession of for one's own use	The ranch owners appropriated the lands that had originally been set aside for the Indians' use.
appurtenances	subordinate possessions	He bought the estate and all its appurtenances.
apropos	with reference to; regarding	I find your remarks apropos of the present situation timely and pertinent.
aptitude	fitness; talent	The counselor evaluated his aptitudes before advising him about the career he should follow.
aquiline	curved, hooked	He can be recognized by his aquiline nose, curved like the beak of the eagle.
arable	fit for plowing	The land was no longer arable; erosion had removed the valuable topsoil.
arbiter	person with power to decide a matter in a dispute; judge	As an arbiter in labor disputes, she has won the confidence of the workers and the employers.
arbitrary	unreasonable or capricious; tyrannical	The coach claimed the team lost because the umpire made some arbitrary calls.
arbitrate	act as judge	She was called upon to arbitrate the dispute between the union and the management.
arboretum	place where different varieties of trees and shrubs are studied and exhibited	Walking along the treelined paths of the arboretum, Rita noted poplars, firs, and some particularly fine sycamores.
arcade	a covered passageway, usually lined with shops	The arcade was popular with shoppers because it gave them protection from the summer sun and the winter rain.
arcane	secret; mysterious	What was arcane to us was clear to the psychologist.
archaeology	study of artifacts and relics of early mankind	The professor of archaeology headed an expedition to the Gobi Desert in search of ancient ruins.
archaic	antiquated	"Methinks," "thee," and "thou" are archaic words that are no longer part of our normal vocabulary.
archetype	prototype; primitive pattern	The Brooklyn Bridge was the archetype of the many spans that now connect Manhattan with Long Island and New Jersey.
archipelago	group of closely located islands	When he looked at the map and saw the archipelagoes in the South Seas, he longed to visit them.
archives	public records; place where public records are kept	These documents should be part of the archives so that historians may be able to evaluate them in the future.
ardor	heat; passion; zeal	Katya's ardor was contagious; soon all her fellow demonstrators were busily making posters and handing out flyers, inspired by her ardent enthusiasm for the cause.
arduous	hard; strenuous	Her arduous efforts had sapped her energy.
argot	slang	In the argot of the underworld, she "was taken for a ride".
aria	operatic solo	At her Metropolitan Opera audition, Marian Anderson sang an aria from Norma.
arid	dry; barren	The cactus had adapted to survive in an arid environment.
aristocracy	hereditary nobility; privileged class	Americans have mixed feelings about hereditary aristocracy:
armada	fleet of warships	Queen Elizabeth's navy was able to defeat the mighty armada that threatened the English coast.
aromatic	fragrant	Medieval sailing vessels brought aromatic herbs from China to Europe.
arraign	charge in court; indict	After his indictment by the Grand Jury, the accused man was arraigned in the County Criminal Court.
array	clothe; adorn	She liked to watch her motherarray herself in her finest clothes before going out for the evening.
array	marshal; draw up in order	His actions were bound to array public sentiment against him.
arrears	being in debt	He was in arrears with his payments on the car.
arrogance	pride, haughtiness	The arrogance of the nobility was resented by the middle class.
arroyo	gully	Until the heavy rains of the past spring, this arroyo had been a dry bed.
articulate	effective; distinct	Her articulate presentation of the advertising campaign impressed her employers.
artifacts	products of primitive culture	Archaeologists debated the significance of the artifacts discovered in the ruins of Asia Minor and came to no conclusion.
artifice	deception; trickery	The Trojan War proved to the Greeks that cunning and artifice were often more effective than military might.
artisan	a manually skilled worker	Artists and artisans alike are necessary to the development of a culture.
artless	without guile; open and honest	Red Riding Hood's artless comment, "Grandma, what big eyes you have!" indicates the child's innocent surprises at her "grandmother's" changed appearance.
ascendancy	controlling influence	President Marcos failed to maintain his ascendency over Philippines.
asceptic	preventing infection; having a cleansing effect	Hospitals succeeded in lowering the mortality rate as soon as they introduced asceptic conditions.
ascetic	practicing self-denial; austere	The wealthy young man could not understand the ascetic life led by the monks.
asceticism	doctrine of self-denial	We find asceticism practiced in many monastries.
ascribe	refer; attribute; assign	I can ascribe no motive for her acts.
ashen	ash-colored; deadly pale	Her face was ashen with fear.
asinine	stupid	Your asinine remarks prove that you have not given this problem any serious consideration.
askance	with a sideways or indirect look	Looking askance at her questioner, she displayed her scorn.
askew	crookedly; slanted; at an angle	When he placed his hat askew upon his head, his observers laughed.
asperity	sharpness (of temper)	These remarks, spoken with asperity, stung the boys to whom they had been directed.
aspersion	slanderous remark	Do not cast aspersions on her character.
aspirant	seeker after position or status	Although I am as aspirant for public office, I am not willing to accept the dictates of the party bosses.
aspiration	noble ambition	Youth's aspirations should be as lofty as the stars.
assail	assault	He was assailed with questions after his lecture.
assay	analyze; evaluate	When they assayed the ore, they found that they had discovered a very rich vein.
assent	agree; accept	It gives me great pleasure to assent to your request.
assert	state strongly or positively; insist on or demand recognition of (rights, claims, etc)	When Jill asserted that nobody else in the junior class had such an early curfew, her parents Asserted themselves, telling her that if she didn't get home by nine o'clock she would be grounded for the week.
assessment	estimation; appraisal	I would like to have your assessment of the situation in South Africa.
assiduous	diligent	It took Rembrandt weeks of assiduous labor before he was satisfied with his portrait of his son.
assimilate	absorb; cause to become homogenous	The manner in which the United States was able to assimilate the hordes of immigrants during the nineteenth and early part of the twentieth centuries will always be a source of pride.
assuage	ease; lessen(pain)	Your messages of cheer should assuage her suffering.
assumption	something taken for granted; the taking over or taking possession of	The young princess made the foolish assumption that the regent would not object to her Assumption of power.
assurance	promise or pledge; certainty; self-confidence	When Gutherie gave Guiness his assurance that rehearsals were going well, he spoke with such assurance that Guiness was convinced.
asteroid	small planet	asteroids have become commonplace to the readers of interstellar travel stories in science fiction magazines.
astigmatism	eye defect that prevents proper focus	As soon as his parents discovered that the boy suffered from astigmatism, they took him to the optometrist for corrective glasses.
astral	relating to the stars	She was amazed at the number of astral bodies the new telescope revealed.
astringent	binding; causing contraction; harsh or severe	The astringent quality of unsweetened lemon juice made swallowing difficult.
astronomical	enormously large or extensive	The government seemed willing to spend astronomical sums on weapons development.
astute	wise; shrewd	That was a very astute observation.
asunder	into parts; apart	Their points of view are poles asunder.
asylum	place of refuge or shelter; protection	The refugees sought asylum from religious persecution in a new land.
asymmetric	not identical on both sides of a dividing central line	Because one eyebrow was set markedly higher than the other, William's face had a particularly asymmetric appearance.
atavism	resemblance to remote ancestors rather than to parents; reversion to an earlier type;	throwback Martin seemed an atavism to his Tuscan ancestors who lavished great care on their small plots of soil.
atheistic	denying the existence of God	His atheistic remarks shocked the religious worshippers.
atone	make amends for; pay for	He knew no way in which he could atone for his brutal crime.
atrocity	brutal deed	In time of war, many atrocities are committed by invading armies.
atrophy	wasting away	Polio victims need physiotherapy to prevent the atrophy of affected limbs.
attenuate	make thin; weaken	By withdrawing their forces, the generals hoped to attenuate the enemy lines.
attest	testify; bear witness	Having served as a member of a grand jury, I can attest that our system of indicting individuals is in need of improvement.
attribute	ascribe; explain	I attribute her success in science to the encouragement she received from her parents.
attribute	essential quality	His outstanding attribute was his kindness.
attrition	gradual wearing down	They decided to wage a war of attrition rather than to rely on all-out attack.
audacious	daring; bold	Audiences cheered as Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia made their audacious, death-defying leap to freedom and escaped Darth Vader's troops.
audit	examination of accounts	When the bank examiners arrived to hold their annual audit, they discovered the embezzlements of the chief cashier.
augment	increase	How can we hope to augment our forces when our allies are deserting us?
augury	omen; prophecy	He interpreted the departures of the birds as an augury of evil.
august	impressive; majestic	Visiting the palace at Versailes, she was impressed by the august surroundings in which she found herself.
aureole	sun's corona; halo	Many medieval paintings depict saintly characters with aureols around their heads.
auroral	pertaining to the aurora borealis	The auroral display was particularly spectacular that evening.
auspicious	favoring success	With favorable weather conditions, it was an auspicious moment to set sail.
austere	strict, stern	His austere demeanor prevented us from engaging in our usual frivolous activities.
austerity	sternness; severity; lack of luxuries	The austerity and dignity of the court were maintained by the new justices, who were a strict and solemn group.
authenticate	prove genuine	An expert was needed to authenticate the original Van Gogh painting, distinguishing it from its imitation.
authoritarian	favoring or exercising total control; non-democratic	The people had no control over their destiny; they were forced to obey the dictates of the authoritarian regime.
authoritative	having the weight of authority; dictatorial	We accepted her analysis of the situation as authoritative.
autocrat	monarch with supreme power	He ran his office like an autocrat, giving no one else any authority.
automaton	mechanism that imitates actions of humans	Long before science fiction readers became aware of robots, writers were creating stories of automation who could outperform humans.
autonomous	self-governing	This island is a colony; however, in most matters, it is autonomous and receives no orders from the mother country.
autopsy	examination of a dead body; postmortem	The medical examiner ordered an autopsy to determine the cause of death.
auxiliary	offering or providing help; additional or sub-sidiary	To prepare for the emergency, they built an auxiliary power station.
avarice	greed for wealth	King Midas's avarice has been famous for centuries.
aver	state confidently	I wish to aver that I am certain of success.
averse	reluctant	He was averse to revealing the sources of his information.
aversion	firm dislike	Their mutual aversion was so great that they refused to speak to one another.
avert	prevent; turn away	She averted her eyes from the dead cat on the highway.
aviary	enclosure for birds	The aviary at the zoo held nearly 300 birds.
avid	greedy; eager for	He was avid for learning and read everything he could get.
avocation	secondary or minor occupation	His hobby proved to be so fascinating and profitable that gradually he abandoned his regular occupation and concentrated on his avocation.
avow	declare openly	I must avow that I am innocent.
avuncular	like an uncle	Avuncular pride did not prevent him from noticing his nephew's shortcomings.
awe	solemn wonder	The tourists gazed with awe at the tremendous expanse of the Grand Canyon.
awl	pointed tool used for piercing	She used an awl to punch additional holes in the leather belt she had bought.
awry	distorted; crooked	He held his head awry, giving the impression that he had caught cold in his neck during the night.
axiom	self-evident truth requiring no proof	Before a student can begin to think along the lines of Euclidean geometry, he must accept certain principles or axioms.
azure	sky blue	azure skies are indicative of good weather.
babble	chatter idly	The little girl babbled about her doll.
bacchanalian	drunken	Emperor Nero attended the bacchanalian orgy.
badger	pester; annoy	She was forced to change her telephone number because she was badgered by obscene phone calls.
badinage	teasing conversation	Her friends at work greeted the news of her engagement with cheerful badinage.
baffle	frustrate; perplex	The new code baffled the enemy agents.
bait	harass; tease	The soldiers baited the prisoners, terrorizing them.
baleful	menacing; deadly	Casting a baleful eye at his successful rival, the rejected suitor stole off, vowing to have his revenge.
balk	foil	When the warden learned that several inmates were planning to escape, he took steps to balk their attempt.
balk	stoop short, as if faced with an obstacle, and refuse to continue	The chief of police balked at sending his officers into the riot-torn area.
ballast	heavy substance used to add stability or weight	The ship was listing badly to one side; it was necessary to shift the ballast in the hold to get her back on an even keel.
balm	something that relieves pain	Friendship is the finest balm for the pangs of disappointed love.
balmy	mild; fragrant	A balmy breeze refreshed us after the sultry blast.
banal	hackneyed; commonplace; trite	His frequent use of cliches made his essay seem banal.
bandy	discuss lightly; exchange blows or words	The president refused to bandy words with reporters at the press conference.
bane	cause of ruin	Lack of public transportation is the bane of urban life.
bantering	good-naturedly ridiculing	They resented his bantering remarks because they misinterpreted his teasing as sarcasm.
barb	sharp projection form fishhook, etc.; pointed comment	The barb from the fishhook caught in his finger as he grabbed the fish.
bard	poet	The ancient bard Homer sang of the fall of Troy.
barefaced	shameless; bold; unconcealed	Shocked by Huck Finn's barefaced lies, Miss Watson prayed the good Lord would give him a sense of his unregenerate wickedness.
baroque	highly ornate	Accustomed to the severe, angular lines of modern skyscrapers, they found the flamboyance of baroque architecture amusing.
barrage	barrier laid down by artillery fire; overwhelming profusion	The company was forced to retreat through the barrage of heavy canyons.
barrister	counselor-at-law	Galsworthy started as a barrister, but when he found the practice of law boring, turned to writing.
barterer	trader	The barterer exchanged trinkets for the natives' furs.
bask	luxuriate; take pleasure in warmth	basking on the beach, she relaxed so completely that she fell asleep.
bastion	stronghold; something seen as a source of protection	The villagers fortified the town hall, hoping this improvised bastion could protect them from the guerrila raids.
bate	let down; restrain	Until it was time to open the presents, the children had to bate their curiosity.
bauble	trinket; trifle	The child was delighted with the bauble she had won in the grab bag.
bawdy	indecent; obscene	She took offense at his bawdy remarks.
beatific	giving bliss; blissful	The beatific smile on the child's face made us very happy.
beatitude	blessedness; state of bliss	Growing closer to God each day, the mystic achieved a state of indescribable beatitude.
bedizen	dress with vulgar finery	The witch doctors were bedizened in their gaudiest costumes.
bedraggle	wet thoroughly	We were so bedraggled by the severe storm that we had to change into dry clothing.
befuddle	confuse thoroughly	His attempts to clarify the situation succeeded only on befuddling her further.
beget	father; produce; give rise to	One good turn may deserve another; it does not necessarily beget another.
begrudge	resent	I begrudge every minute I have to spend attending meetings.
beguile	amuse; delude; cheat	I beguiled himself during the long hours by playing solitaire.
behemoth	huge creature; something of monstrous size or power	Sportcasters nicknamed the linebacker "The Behemoth".
beholden	obligated; indebted	Since I do not wish to be beholden to anyone, I cannot accept this favor.
behoove	be suited to; be incumbent upon	In this time of crisis, it behooves all of us to remain calm and await the instructions of our superiors.
belabor	explain or go over excessively or to a ridiculous degree; assail verbally	The debate coach warned her student not to bore the audience by belaboring his point.
belated	delayed	He apologized for his belated note of condolence to the widow of his friend and explained that he had just learned of her husband's untimely death.
beleaguer	besiege	As soon as the city was beleaguered, the life became more subdued as the citizens began their long wait for outside assitance.
belie	contradict; give a false impression	His coarse, hard-bitten exterior belied his innate sensitivity.
belittle	disparage; depreciate	Parents should not belittle their children's early attempts at drawing, but should encourage their efforts.
bellicose	warlike	His bellicose disposition alienated his friends.
belligerent	quarrelsome	Whenever he had too much to drink, he became belligerent and tried to pick fights with strangers.
bemused	confused; lost in thought; preoccupied	Jill studied the garbled instructions with a bemused look on her face.
benediction	blessing	The appearance of the sun after the many rainy days was like a benediction.
benefactor	gift giver; patron	Scrooge later became Tiny Tim's benefactor and gave him a benediction.
beneficent	kindly; doing good	The overgenerous philanthropist had to curb his beneficent impulses before he gave away all his money and left himself with nothing.
beneficiary	person entitled to benefits or proceeds of an insurance policy	You may change your beneficiary as often as you wish.
benevolent	generous; charitable	His benevolent nature prevented him from refusing any beggar who accosted him.
benign	kindly; favorable; not malignant	The old man was well liked because of his benign attitude toward friend and stranger alike.
benison	blessing	Let us pray that the benison of peace once more shall prevail among the nations of the world.
bent	determined; natural talent or inclination	bent on advancing in the business world, the secretary heroine of Working Girl had a true bent for high finance.
bequeath	leave to someone by means of a will; hand down	In his will, Father bequeathed his watch to Phillip; the bequest meant a great deal to the boy.
berate	scold strongly	He feared she would berate him for his forgetfulness.
bereavement	state of being deprived of something valuable or beloved	His friends gathered to console him upon his sudden bereavement.
bereft	deprived of; lacking	The foolish gambler soon found himself bereft of funds.
berserk	frenzied	Angered, he went berserk and began to wreck the room.
beset	harass; trouble	Many problems beset the American public school system.
besmirch	soil, defile	The scandalous remarks in the newspaper besmirch the reputations of every member of the society.
bestial	beastlike; brutal; inhuman	The Red Cross sought to put an end to the bestial treatment of prisoners of war.
bestow	confer	He wished to bestow great honors upon the hero.
betroth	become engaged to marry	The announcement that they had become betrothed surprised their friends who had not suspected any romance.
bevy	large group	The movie actor was surrounded by a bevy of startlets.
bicameral	two-chambered, as a legislative body	The United States Congress is a bicameral body.
bicker	quarrel	The children bickered morning, noon, and night, exasperating their parents.
biennial	every two years	The group held biennial meetings instead of annual ones.
bifurcated	divided into two branches; forked	With a bifurcated branch and a piece of elastic rubber, he made a crude but effective slingshot.
bigotry	stubborn intolerance	Brought up in a democratic atmosphere, student was shocked by the bigotry and narrowness expressed by several of his classmates.
bilious	suffering from indigestion; irritable	His bilious temperament was apparent to all who heard him rant about his difficulties.
bilk	swindle; cheat	The con man specialized in bilking insurance companies.
bivouac	temporary encampment	While in bivouac, we spent the night in our sleeping bags under the stars.
bizarre	fantastic; violently contrasting	The plot of the novel was too bizarre to be believed.
blanch	bleach; whiten	Although age had blanched his hair, he was still vigorous and energetic.
bland	soothing; mild	She used a bland ointment for her sunburn.
blandishment	flattery	Despite the salesperson's blandishments, the customer did not buy the outfit.
blase	bored with pleasure or dissipation	Your blase attitude gives your students an erroneous impression of the joys of scholarship.
blasphemous	profane; impious	The people in the room were shocked by his his blasphemous language.
blatant	extremely obvious; loudly offensive	Caught in a blatant lie, the scoundrel had only one regret: he wished that he had lied more subtly.
bleak	cold; cheerless	The Aleutian Islands are bleak military outposts.
blighted	suffering from a disease; destroyed	The extent of the blighted areas could be seen only when viewed from the air.
blithe	gay; joyous; careless	Shelley called the skylark a "blithe spirit" because of its happy song.
bloated	swollen or puffed as with water or air	Her bloated stomach came from drinking so much water.
blowhard	talkative boaster	After all Sol's talk about his big show business connections led nowhere, Sally decided he was just another blowhard.
bludgeon	club; heavy-headed weapon	His walking stick served him as a bludgeon on many occasions.
bluff	pretense (of strength); deception; high cliff	Claire thought Lord Byron's boast that he would swim the Hellespont was just a bluff, she was astounded when he dove from the high bluff into the waters below.
blunder	error	The criminal's fatal blunder led to his capture.
blurt	utter impulsively	Before she could stop him, he blurted out the news.
bode	foreshadow; portend	The gloomy skies and the sulfurious odors from the mineral springs seemed to bode evil to those who settled in the area.
bogus	counterfeit; not authentic	The police quickly found the distributors of the bogus twenty-dollar bills.
boisterous	violent; rough; noisy	The unruly crowd became even more boisterous when he tried to quiet them.
bolster	support; reinforce	The debaters amassed file boxes full of evidence to bolster their arguments.
bombast	pompous, inflated language	Filled with bombast, the orator's speech left the audience more impressed with his pomposity than with his logic.
boon	blessing; benefit	The recent rains that filled our empty reservoirs were a boon to the whole community.
boorish	rude; insensitive	Though Mr. Potts constantly interrupted his wife, she ignored his boorish behavior, for she had lost hope of teaching him courtesy.
bouillon	clear beef soup	The cup of bouillon served by the stewards was welcomed by those who had been chilled by the cold ocean breezes.
bountiful	generous; showing bounty	She distributed gifts in a bountiful and gracious manner.
bourgeois	middle class	The French Revolution was inspired by the bourgeois, who resented the aristocracy.
bovine	cowlike; placid and dull	Nothing excites Esther; even when she won the state lottery, she still preserved her air of bovine calm.
bowdlerize	expurgate	After the film editors had bowdlerized the language in the script, the motion picture's rating was changed from "R" to "PG".
brackish	somewhat saline	He found the only wells in the area were brackish; drinking the water made him nauseous.
braggadocio	boasting	He was disliked because his manner was always full of braggadocio.
braggart	boaster	Modest by nature, she was no braggart, preferring to let her accomplishments speak for themselves.
bravado	swagger; assumed air of defiance	The bravado of the young criminal disappeared when he was confronted by the victims of his brutal attack.
brawn	muscular strength; sturdiness	It takes brawn to become a champion weight-lifter.
brazen	insolent	Her brazen contempt for authority angered the officials.
breach	breaking of contract or duty; fissure; gap	They found a breach in the enemy's fortifications and penetrated their lines.
breadth	width; extent	We were impressed by the breadth of her knowledge.
brevity	conciseness	brevity is essential when you send a telegram or cablegram; you are charged for every word.
brindled	tawny or grayish with streaks or spots	He was disappointed in the litter because the puppies were brindled; he had hoped for animals of uniform color.
bristling	rising like bristles; showing irritation	The dog stood there, bristling with anger.
brittle	easily broken; difficult	My employer's brittle personality made it difficult for me to get along with her.
broach	open up	He did not even try to broach the subject of poetry.
brocade	rich, figured fabric	The sofa was covered with expensive brocade.
brochure	pamphlet	This brochure on farming was issued by the Department of Agriculture.
brooch	ornamental clasp	She treasured the brooch because it was an heirloom.
brook	tolerate; endure	The dean would brook no interference with his disciplinary actions.
browbeat	bully; intimidate	Billy resisted Ted's attempts to browbeat him into handing over his lunch money.
brusque	blunt; abrupt	She was offended by his brusque reply.
bucolic	rustic; pastoral	The meadow was the scene of bucolic gaiety.
buffoonery	clowning	John Candy's buffoonery in Uncle Buck was hilarious.
bugaboo	bugbear; object of baseless terror	If we become frightened by such bugaboos, we are no wiser than the birds who fear scarecrows.
bullion	gold and silver in the form of bars	Much bullion is stored in the vaults at Fort Knox.
bulwark	earthwork or other strong defense; person who defends	The navy is our principal bulwark against invasion.
bungle	spoil by clumsy behavior	I was afraid you would bungle his assignment but I had no one else to send.
bureaucracy	government by bureaus	Many people fear that the constant introduction of federal agencies will create a government by bureaucracy.
burgeon	grow forth; send out buds	In the spring, the plants that burgeon are a promise of the beauty that is to come.
burlesque	give an imitation that ridicules	In his caricature, he burlesqued the mannerisms of his adversary.
burly	husky; muscular	The burly mover lifted the packing crate with ease.
burnish	make shiny by rubbing; polish	The maid burnished the brass fixtures until they reflected the lamplight.
buttress	support; prop up	Just as architects buttress the walls of cathedrals with flying buttresses, debates buttress their arguments with facts.
buxom	full-bosomed; plump; jolly	High fashion models usually are slender rather than buxom.
cabal	small group of persons secretly united to promote their own interests	The cabal was defeated when its scheme was discovered.
cache	hiding place	The detectives followed the suspects until he led them to the cache where he had stored his loot.
cacophony	discord	Some people seem to enjoy the cacophony of an orchestra that is tuning up.
cadaver	corpse	In some states, it is illegal to dissect cadavers.
cadaverous	like a corpse; pale	From his cadaverous appearance, we could see how the disease had ravaged him.
cadence	rhythmic rise and fall (of words or sounds); beat	Marching down the road, the troops sang out, following the cadence set by the sergeant.
cajole	coax; wheedle	I will not be cajoled into granting your wish.
calamity	disaster; misery	As news of the calamity spread, offers of relief poured in to the stricken community.
caliber	ability; capacity	A man of such caliber should not be assigned such menial tasks.
calligraphy	beautiful writing; excellent penmanship	As we examine ancient manuscripts, we became impressed with the calligraphy of the scribes.
callous	hardened; unfeeling	He had worked in the hospital for so many years that he was callous to the suffering in the wards.
callow	youthful; immature	In that youthful movement, the leaders were only a little less callow than their immature followers.
calorific	heat-producing	Coal is much more calorific than green wood.
calumny	malicious misrepresentation	He could endure his financial failure, but he could not bear the calumny that his foes heaped upon him.
camaraderie	good-fellowship	What he loved best about his job was the sense of camaraderie he and his co-workers shared.
cameo	shell or jewel carved in relief	Tourists are advised not to purchase cameos from the street peddlers of Rome who sell poor specimens of the carver's art.
canard	unfounded rumor	It is almost impossible to protect oneself from such a base canard.
candor	frankness	The candor and simplicity of his speech impressed all, it was all clear he held nothing back.
canine	related to dogs; doglike	Some days the canine population of Berkeley seems almost to outnumber the human population.
canker	any ulcerous sore; any evil	Poverty is a canker in the body politic; it must be cured.
canny	shrewd; thrifty	The canny Scotsman was more than a match for the swindlers.
cant	pious phraseology; jargon of criminals	Angry that the president had slashed the education budget, we dismissed his speech on the importance of education as mere cant.
cantankerous	ill-humored; irritable	Constantly complaining about his treatment and refusing to cooperate with the hospital staff, he was a cantankerous patient.
cantata	story set to music, to be sung by a chorus	The choral society sang the new cantata composed by its leader.
canter	slow gallop	Because the racehorse had outdistanced its competition so easily, the reporter wrote that the race was won in a canter.
canto	division of a long poem	Dante's poetic masterpiece The Divine Comedy is divided into cantos.
canvass	determine or seek opinions, votes, etc	After canvassing the sentiments of his constituents, the congressman was confident that he represented the majority opinion of his district.
capacious	spacious	In the capacious areas of the railroad terminal, thousands of travelers lingered while waiting for their train.
capillary	having a very fine bore	The changes in surface tension of liquids in capillary vessels is of special interest to physicists.
capitulate	surrender	The enemy was warned to capitulate or face annihilation.
caprice	whim	She was an unpredictable creature, acting on caprice, never taking thought of the consequences.
capricious	fickle; incalculable	The storm was capricious and changed course constantly.
caption	title; chapter heading; text under illustration	I find the captions that accompany these cartoons very clever and humorous.
captious	faultfinding	His criticisms were always captious and frivolous, never offering constructive suggestions.
carafe	glass water bottle	With each dinner, the patron receives a carafe of red or white wine.
carapace	shell covering the back (of a turtle, crab, etc)	At the children's zoo, Richard perched on top of the giant turtle's hard carapace as it slowly made its way around the enclosure.
carat	unit of weight for precious stones; measure of fineness of gold	He gave her a diamond that weighed three carats and was mounted in an eighteen-carat gold band.
carcinogenic	causing cancer	Many supposedly harmless substances have been revealed to be carcinogenic.
cardinal	chief	If you want to increase your word power, the cardinal rule of vocabulary-building is to read.
careen	lurch; sway from side to side	The taxicab careened wildly as it rounded the corner.
caricature	distortion; burlesque	The caricatures he drew always emphasized personal weaknesses of the people he burlesqued.
carillon	set of bells capable of being played	The carillon in the bell tower of the Coca-Cola pavilion at the New York World's Fair provided musical entertainment every hour.
carnage	destruction of life	The carnage that can be caused by atomic warfare adds to the responsibilities of our statesmen.
carnal	fleshly	The public was more interested in carnal pleasures than in spiritual matters.
carnivorous	meat-eating	The lion is a carnivorous animal.
carousal	drunken revel	The party degenerated into an ugly carousal.
carping	petty criticism; fault-finding	Welcoming constructive criticism, Lexy appreciated her editor's comments, finding them free of carping.
carrion	rotting flesh of a dead body	Buzzards are nature's scavengers; they eat the carrion left behind by other predators.
cartographer	map-maker	Though not a professional cartographer, Tolkien was able to construct a map of the fictional world.
cascade	small waterfall We could not appreciate the beauty of the many cascades as we made detours around each of them to	avoid getting wet.
caste	one of the hereditary classes in Hindu society, social stratification; prestige	The differences created by caste in India must be wiped out if true democracy is to prevail in that country.
castigation	punishment; severe criticism	Sensitive even to mild criticism, Woolf could not bear castigation that she found in certain reviews.
casualty	serious or fatal accident	The number of automotive casualties on this holiday weekend was high.
cataclysm	deluge; upheaval	A cataclysm such as the French Revolution affects all countries.
catalyst	agent that brings about a chemical change while it remains unaffected and unchanged	Many chemical reactions cannot take place without the presence of a catalyst.
catapult	slingshot; hurling machine	Airplanes are sometimes launched from battleships by catapults.
cataract	great waterfall; eye abnormality	She gazed with awe at the mighty cataract known as Niagara Falls.
catastrophe	calamity	The Johnstown flood was a catastrophe.
catechism	book for religious instruction; instruction by question and answer	He taught by engaging his pupils in a catechism until they gave him the correct answer.
categorical	without exceptions; unqualified; absolute	Though the captain claimed he was never, never sick at sea, he finally qualified his categorical denial; he was hardly ever sick at sea.
catharsis	purging or cleansing of any passage of the body	Aristotle maintained that tragedy created a catharsis by purging the soul of base concepts.
cathartic	purgative	Some drugs act as laxatives when taken in small doses but act as cathartics when taken in much larger doses.
catholic	universal; wide-ranging liberal	He was extremely catholic in his taste and read everything he could find in the library.
caucus	private meeting of members of a party to select officers or determine policy	At the opening of Congress the members of the Democratic Party held a caucus to elect the majority leader of the House and the party whip.
caulk	to make watertight (by plugging seams) When water from the shower leaked into the basement, we knew it was time to caulk the tiles at the edges	of the shower stall.
causal	implying a cause-and-effect relationship	The psychologist maintained there was a causal relationship between the nature of one's early childhood experiences and one's adult personality.
caustic	burning; sarcastically biting	The critic's caustic remarks angered the hapless actors who were the subjects of his sarcasm.
cauterize	burn with hot iron or caustic	In order to prevent infection, the doctor cauterized the wound.
cavalcade	procession; parade	As described by Chaucer, the cavalcade of Canterbury pilgrims was motley group.
cavalier	casual and offhand; arrogant	Sensitive about having her ideas taken lightly, Marcia felt insulted by Mark's cavalier dismissal of her suggestion.
cavil	make frivolous objections	I respect your sensible criticisms, but I dislike the way you cavil about unimportant details.
cede	transfer; yield title to	I intend to cede this property to the city.
celerity	speed; rapidity	Hamlet resented his mother's celerity in remarrying within a month after his father's death.
celestial	heavenly	She spoke of the celestial joys that awaited virtuous souls in the hereafter.
celibate	abstaining from sexual intercourse; unmarried	Though the late Havelock Ellis wrote extensively about sexual customs and was considered an expert in such matters, recent studies maintain he was celibate throughout his life.
censor	overseer of morals; person who eliminates inappropriate matter	Soldiers dislike having their mail read by a censor but understand the need for this precaution.
censorious	critical	censorious people delight in casting blame.
censure	blame; criticize	He was censured for his inappropriate behavior.
centaur	mythical figure, half man and half horse	I was particularly impressed by the statue of the centaur in the Roman Hall of the museum.
centigrade	denoting a widely used temperature scale (basically same as Celsius)	On the centigrade thermometer, the freezing point of water is zero degrees.
centrifugal	radiating; departing from the center	Many automatic drying machines remove excess moisture from clothing by centrifugal force.
centrifuge	machine that separates substances by whirling them	At the dairy, we employ a centrifuge to separate cream from milk.
centripetal	tending toward the center	Does centripetal force or the force of gravity bring orbiting bodies to the earth's surface?
centurion	Roman army officer	Because he was in command of a company of one hundred soldiers, he was called a centurion.
cerebral	pertaining to the brain or intellect	The content of philosophical works is cerebral in nature and requires much thought.
cerebration	thought	Mathematics problems sometimes require much cerebration.
ceremonious	marked by formality	Ordinary dress would be in appropriate at so ceremonious an affair.
cessation	stopping	The workers threatened a cessation of all activities if their demands were not met.
cession	yielding to another; ceding	The cession of Alaska to the United States is discussed in this chapter.
chafe	warm by rubbing	The collar chafed his neck.
chaff	worthless products of an endeavor	When you separate the wheat from the chaff, be sure you throw out the chaff.
chaffing	bantering; joking	Sometimes his flippant and chaffing remarks annoy us.
chagrin	vexation; disappointment	Her refusal to go with us filled us with chagrin.
chalice	goblet; consecrated cup	In a small room adjoining the cathedral, many ornately decorated chalices made by the most famous European goldsmiths were on display.
chameleon	lizard that changes color in different situations	Like the chameleon, he assumed the political coloration of every group he met.
champion	support militantly Martin Luther King, Jr., won the Nobel Peace Prize because he championed the oppressed in their struggle	for equality.
chaotic	in utter disorder	He tried to bring order into the chaotic state of affairs.
charisma	divine gift; great popular charm or appeal	Political commentators have deplored the importance of a candidate's charisma in these days of television campaigning.
charlatan	quack; pretender to knowledge	When they realized that the Wizard didn't know how to get them back to Kansas, Dorothy and her friends were sure they'd been duped by a charlatan.
chary	cautious; sparing or restrained about giving	A prudent, thrifty New Englander, DeWitt was as chary of investing money in junk bonds as he was chary of paying people unnecessary compliments.
chase	ornament a metal surface by indenting	With his hammer, he carefully chased an intricate design onto the surface of the chalice.
chasm	abyss	They could not see the bottom of the chasm.
chassis	framework and working parts of an automobile	Examining the car after the accident, the owner discovered that the body had been ruined but that the chassis was unharmed.
chaste	pure	Her chaste and decorous garb was appropriately selected for the solemnity of the occasion.
chasten	discipline; punish in order to correct	Whom God loves, God chastens.
chastise	punish	I must chastise you for this offense.
chauvinist	blindly devoted patriot	A chauvinist cannot recognize any faults in his country, no matter how flagrant they may be.
check	stop motion; curb or restrain	Thrusting out her arm, Grandma checked Bobby's lunge at his sister. "Young man," she said, "you'd better check your temper".
checkered	marked by changes in fortune	During his checkered career he had lived in palatial mansions and in dreary boardinghouses.
cherubic	angelic; innocent-looking	With her cheerful smile and rosy cheeks, she was a particularly cherubic child.
chicanery	trickery	Your deceitful tactics in this case are indications of chicanery.
chide	scold	Grandma began to chide Steven for his lying.
chimerical	fantastic; highly imaginative	Poe's chimerical stories are sometimes too morbid for reading in bed.
chivalrous	courteous; faithful; brave	chivalrous behavior involves noble words and good deeds.
choleric	hot-tempered	His flushed, angry face indicated a choleric nature.
choreography	art of dancing	Martha Graham introduced a form of choreography that seemed awkward and alien to those who had been brought up on classic ballet.
chronic	long established, as a disease	The doctors were finally able to attribute his chronic headaches and nausea to traces of formaldehyde gas in his apartment.
chronicle	report; record (in chronological order)	The gossip columnist was paid to chronicle the latest escapades of the socially prominent celebrities.
churlish	boorish; rude	Dismayed by his churlish manners at the party, the girls vowed never to invite him again.
ciliated	having minute hairs	The paramecium is a ciliated, one-celled animal.
cipher	nonentity; worthless person or thing	She claimed her ex-husband was a total cipher and wondered why she had ever married him.
cipher	secret code	Lacking his code book, the spy was unable to decode the message sent to him in cipher.
circlet	small ring; band	This tiny circlet is very costly because it is set with precious stones.
circuitous	roundabout	Because of the traffic congestion on the main highways, she took a circuitous route.
circumlocution	indirect or roundabout expression	He was afraid to call spade a spade and resorted to circumlocutions to avoid direct reference to his subject.
circumscribe	limit; confine Although I do not wish to circumscribe your activities, I must insist that you complete this assignment	before you start anything else.
circumspect	prudent; cautious	Investigating before acting, she tried always to be circumspect.
circumvent	outwit; baffle	In order to circumvent the enemy, we will make two preliminary attacks in other sections before starting our major campaign.
citadel	fortress	The citadel overlooked the city like a protecting angel.
cite	quote; commend	She could cite passages in the Bible from memory.
civil	having to do with citizens or the state; courteous and polite	Although internal Revenue Service agents are civil servants, they are not always civil to suspected tax evaders.
clairvoyant	having foresight; fortuneteller	Cassandra's clairvoyant warning was not heeded by the Trojans.
clamber	climb by crawling	She clambered over the wall.
clamor	noise	The clamor of the children at play outside made it impossible for her to take a nap.
clandestine	secret	After avoiding their chaperon, the lovers had a clandestine meeting.
clangor	loud, resounding noise	The blacksmith was accustomed to the clangor of hammers on steel.
clapper	striker (tongue) of a bell	Wishing to be undisturbed by the bell, Dale wound his scarf around the clapper to muffle its striking.
clarion	shrill, trumpetlike sound	We woke to the clarion to muffle its striking.
claustrophobia	fear of being locked in	His fellow classmates laughed at his claustrophobia and often threatened to lock him in his room.
clavicle	collarbone	Even though he wore shoulder pads, the football player broke his clavicle during a practice scrimmage.
cleave	split asunder	The lightening cleaves the tree in two.
cleft	split	Erosion caused a cleft in the huge boulder.
clemency	disposition ot be lenient; mildness, as of the weather	The lawyer was pleased when the case was sent to Judge Smith's chambers because Smith was noted for her clemency toward first offenders.
cliche	phrase culled in meaning by repetition	High school compositions are often marred by such cliches as "strong as an ox".
clientele	body of customers	The rock club attracted a young, stylish clientele.
climactic	relating to the highest point	When he reached the climactic portions of the book, he could not stop reading.
clime	region; climate	His doctors advised him to move to a milder clime.
clique	small, exclusive group	She charged that a clique had assumed control of school affairs.
cloister	monastery or convent	The nuns lived in the cloister.
clout	great influence (especially political or social)	Gatsby wondered whether he had enough clout to be admitted to the exclusive club.
cloying	distasteful (because excessive); excessively sweet or sentimental	Disliking the cloying sweetness of standard wedding cakes, Jody and Tom chose a homemade carrot cake for their reception.
coagulate	thicken; congeal; clot	Even after you remove the pudding from the burner, it will continue to coagulate as it stands.
coalesce	combine; fuse	The brooks coalesce into one large river.
coda	concluding section of a musical or literary composition	The piece concluded with a distinctive coda that strikingly brought together various motifs.
coddle	treat gently; pamper	Don't coddle the children to much; they need a taste of discipline.
codicil	supplement to the body of a will	This codicil was drawn up five years after the writing of the original will.
codify	arrange (laws, rules) as a code; classify We need to take the varying rules and regulations of the different health agencies and codify them into a	national health code.
coercion	use of force	They forced him to obey, but only by great coercion.
coeval	living at the same time as; contemporary	coeval with the dinosaur, the pterodactyl flourished during the Mesozoic era.
cog	tooth projecting from a wheel	A bicycle chain moves through a series of cogs in order to propel the bike.
cogent	convincing	She presented cogent arguments to the jury.
cogitate	think over	cogitate on this problem; the solution will come.
cognate	related linguistically; allied by blood; similar or akin in nature	The English word "mother" cognate to the Latin word "mater," whose influence is visible in the words "maternal" and "maternity".
cognitive	having to do with knowing or perceiving related to the mental precesses	Though Jack was emotionally immature, his cognitive development was admirable; he was very advanced intellectually.
cognizance	knowledge	During the election campaign, the two candidates were kept in full cognizance of the international situation.
cohere	stick together	Solids have a greater tendency to cohere than liquids.
cohesion	tendency to keep together	A firm believer in the maxim "Divide and conquer," the emperor, by lies and trickery, sought to disrupt the cohesion ofthe free nations.
cohorts	armed band	Caesar and his Roman cohorts conquered almost all of the known world.
coiffure	hairstyle	You can make a statement with your choice of coiffure: in the 60's many African-Americans affirmed their racial heritage by wearing their hair in Afros.
coincident	occurring at the same time	Some people find the coincident events in Hardy's novels annoyingly improbable.
colander	utensil with perforated bottom used for straining	Before serving the spaghetti, place it in a colander to drain it.
collaborate	work together	Two writers collaborated in preparing this book.
collage	work of art put together from fragments	Scraps of cloth, paper doilies, and old photographs all went into her collage.
collate	examine in order to verify authenticity; arrange in order	They collated the newly found manuscripts to determine their age.
collateral	security given for loan	The sum you wish to borrow is so large that it must be secured by collateral.
collation	a light meal	Tea sandwiches and cookies were offered at the collation.
colloquial	pertaining to conversational or common speech	Your use of colloquial expressions in a formal essay such as the one you have presented spoils the effect you hope to achieve.
colloquy	informal discussion	I enjoy our colloquies but I sometimes wish that they could be made more formal and more searching.
collusion	conspiring in a fraudulent scheme	The swindlers were found guilty of collusion.
colossal	huge	Radio City Music Hall has a colossal stage.
colossus	gigantic statue	The legendary Colossus of Rhodes, bronze statue of the sun god that dominated the harbor of the Greek seaport, was one of the Seven Wonders of the World.
comatose	in a coma; extremely sleepy	The long-winded orator soon had his audience in a comatose state.
combustible	easily burned	After the recent outbreak of fires in private homes, the fire commissioner ordered that all combustible materials be kept in safe containers.
comely	attractive; agreeable	I would rather have a poor and comely wife than a rich and homely one.
comestible	something fit to be eaten	The roast turkey and other comestibles, the wines, and the excellent service made this Thanksgiving dinner particularly memorable.
comeuppance	rebuke; deserts	After his earlier rudeness, we were delighted to see him get his comeuppance.
comity	courtesy; civility	A spirit of comity should exist among nations.
commandeer	to draft for military purposes; to take for public use	The policeman commandeered the first car that approached and ordered the driver to go to the nearest hospital.
commemorative	remembering; honoring	The new commemorative stamp honors the late Martin Luther King, Jr.
commensurate	equal in extent	Your reward will be commensurate with your effort.
commiserate	feel or express pity or sympathy for	Her friends commiserated with the widow.
commodious	spacious and comfortable	After sleeping in a small roadside cabins, they found their hotel suite commodious.
communal	held in common; of a group of people	When they were divorced, they had trouble dividing their communal property.
compact	agreement; contract	The signers of the Mayflower Compact were establishing a form of government.
compact	tightly packed; firm; brief	His short, compact body was better suited to wrestling than to basketball.
compatible	harmonious; in harmony with	They were compatible neighbors, never quarreling over unimportant matters.
compelling	overpowering; irresistible in effect	The prosecutor presented a well-reasoned case, but the defense attorney's compelling arguments for leniency won over the jury.
compendium	brief, comprehensive summary	This text can serve as a compendium of the tremendous amount of new material being developed in this field.
compensatory	making up for; repaying	Can a compensatory education program make up for the inadequate schooling he received in earlier years?
compilation	listing of statistical information in tabular or book form	The compilation of available scholarships serves a very valuable purpose.
complacent	self-satisfied	There was a complacent look on his face as he examined his paintings.
complaisant	trying to please; obliging	The courtier obeyed the king's orders in a complaisant manner.
complement	complete; consummate; make perfect	The waiter recommended a glass of port to complement the cheese.
compliance	conformity in fulfilling requirements; readiness to yield	The design for the new school had to be in compliance with the local building code.
compliant	yielding	He was compliant and ready to go along with his friends' desires.
complicity	participation; involvement	You cannot keep your complicity in this affair secret very long; you would be wise to admit your involvement immediately.
component	element; ingredient	I wish all the components of my stereo system were working at the same time.
comport	bear one's self; behave	He comported himself with great dignity.
composure	mental calmness	Even the latest work crisis failed to shake her composure.
compound	combine; constitute; pay interest; increase	The makers of the popular cold remedy compounded a nasal decongestant with an antihistamine.
comprehensive	thorough; inclusive	This book provides a comprehensive review of verbal and math skills for the SAT.
compress	close; squeeze; contract	She compressed the package under her arm.
comprise	include; consist of	If the District of Columbia were to be granted a statehood, the United States of America would comprise fifty-onestates, not just fifty.
compromise	adjust; endanger the interests or reputation of	Your presence at the scene of the dispute compromises our claim to neutrality in this matter.
compunction	remorse	The judge was especially severe in this sentencing because he felt that the criminal had shown no compunction for his heinous crime.
compute	reckon; calculate	He failed to compute the interest, so his bank balance was not accurate.
concatenate	link as in a chain	It is difficult to understand how these events could concatenate as they did without outside assistance.
concave	hollow	The back-packers found partial shelter from the storm by huddling against the concave wall of the cliff.
concede	admit; hield	Despite all the evidence Monica had assembled, Mark refused to concede that she was right.
conceit	whimsical idea; extravagant metaphor	He was an entertaining companion, always expressing himself in amusing conceits and witty turns of phrase.
concentric	having a common center	The target was made of concentric circles.
conception	beginning; forming of a idea	At the first conception of the work, he was consulted.
concerted	mutually agreed on; done together	The girl scouts in the troop made a concerted effort to raise funds for their annual outing, and emitted a concerted sigh when their leader announced that they had reached their goal.
concession	an act of yielding	Before they could reach an agreement, both sides had to make certain concessions.
conciliatory	reconciling; soothing	She was still angry despite his conciliatory words.
concise	brief and compact	When you define a new word, be concise; the shorter the definition, the easier it is to remember.
conclave	private meeting	He was present at all their conclaves as an unofficial observer.
conclusive	decisive; ending all debate	When the stolen books turned up in John's locker, we finally had conclusive evidence of the identity of the mysterious thief.
concoct	prepare by combining; make up in concert	How did the inventive chef ever concoct such strange dish?
concomitant	that which accompanies	Culture is not always a concomitant of wealth.
concord	harmony	Watching Tweediedum and Tweedledee battle, Alice wondered why the two brothers could not manage to life in concord.
concur	agree	Did you concur with the decision of the court or did you find it unfair?
concurrent	happening at the same time	In America, the colonists were resisting the demands of the mother contry; at the concurrent moment in France, the middle class was sowing the seeds of rebellion.
condescend	bestow courtesies with a superior air	The king condescended to grant an audience to the friends of the condemned man.
condign	adequate; deservedly severe	The public approved the condign punishment for the crime.
condiments	seasonings; spices	Spanish food is full of condiments.
condole	express sympathetic sorrow	His friends gathered to condole with him over his loss.
condone	overlook; forgive; give tacit approval; excuse	Unlike Widow Douglass, who condoned Huck's minor offenses, Miss Watson did nothing but scold.
conducive	helpful; contributive	Rest and proper diet are conducive to good health.
conduit	aqueduct; passageway for fluids	Water was brought to the army in the desert by an improvised conduit from the adjoining mountain.
confidant	trusted friend	He had no confidants with whom he could discuss his problems at home.
confiscate	seize; commandeer	The army confiscated all available supplies of uranium.
conflagration	great fire	In the conflagration that followed the 1906 earthquake, much of San Francisco was destroyed.
confluence	flowing together; crowd	They built the city at the confluence of two rivers.
conformity	harmony; agreement	In conformity with our rules and regulations, I am calling a meeting of our organization.
confound	confuse; puzzle	No mystery could confound Sherlock Holmes for long.
congeal	freeze; coagulate	His blood congealed in his veins as he saw the dread monster rush toward him.
congenial	pleasant; friendly	My father loved to go out for a meal with congenial companions.
congenital	existing at birth	His congenital deformity disturbed his parents.
conglomeration	mass of material sticking together	In such a conglomeration of miscellaneous statistics, it was impossible to find a single area of analysis.
congruence	correspondence of parts; harmonious relationship	The student demonstrated the congruence of the two triangles by using the hypotenuse-arm theorem.
conifer	pine tree; cone-bearing tree	According to geologists, the conifers were the first plants to bear flowers.
conjecture	surmise; guess	I will end all your conjectures; I admit I am guilty as charged.
conjugal	pertaining to marriage	Their dreams of conjugal bliss were shattered as soon as their temperaments clashed.
conjure	summon a devil; proactive magic; imagine; invent	He conjured up an image of a reformed city and had the voters completely under his spell.
connivance	pretense of ignorance of something wrong; assistance; permission to offend	With the connivance of his friends, he plotted to embarrass the teacher.
connoisseur	person competent to act as judge of art, ect.; a lover of an art	She had developed into a connoisseur of fine china.
connotation	suggested or implied meaning of an expression	Foreigners frequently are unaware of the connotations of the words they use.
connubial	pertaining to maffige or the matrimonial state	In his telegram, he wished the newlyweds a lifetime of connubial bliss.
consanguinity	kinship	The lawsuit developed into a test of the consanguinity of the claimant to the estate.
conscientious	scrupulous; careful	A conscientious editor checked every definition for its accuracy.
conscript	draftee; person forced into military service	Did Rambo volunteer to fight in Vietnam, or was he a conscript, drafted against his will?
consecrate	dedicate; sanctify	We shall consecrate our lives to this noble purpose.
consensus	general agreement	The consensus indicates that we are opposed to entering into this pact.
consequential	pompous; self-important	Convinced of his own importance, the actor strutted about the dressing room with a consequential air.
conservatory	school of the fine arts (especiallymusic or drama)	A gifted violinist, Marya was selected to study at the conservatory.
consign	deliver officially; entrust; set apart	The court consigned the child to her paternal grandmother's care.
consistency	absence of contradictions; dependability; uniformity; degree of thickness	Holmes judged puddings and explanations on their consistency; he liked his puddings without lumps and his explanations without improbabilities.
console	lessen sadness or disappointment; give comfort	When her father died, Marius did his best to console Cosette.
consonance	harmony; agreement	Her agitation seemed out of consonance with her usual calm.
consort	associate with	We frequently judge people by the company with whom they consort.
consort	husband or wife	The search for a consort for the young Queen Victoria ended happily.
conspiracy	treacherous plot	Brutus and Cassius joined in the conspiracy to kill Julius Caesar.
constituent	supporter	The congressman received hundreds of letters from angry constituents after the Equal Rights Amendment failed to pass.
constraint	compulsion; repression of feelings	There was a feeling of constraint in the room because no one dared to criticize the speaker.
construe	explain; interpret	If I construe your remarks correctly, you disagree with the theory already advanced.
consummate	complete	I have never seem anyone who makes as many stupid errors as you do; you must be a consummate idiot.
contagion	infection	Fearing contagion, they took drastic steps to prevent the spread of the disease.
contaminate	pollute	The sewage system of the city so contaminated the water that swimming was forbidden.
contempt	scorn; disdain	Even if you feel superior to others, it is unwise to show your contempt for them.
contend	struggle; compete; assert earnestly	In Revolt of the Black Athlete, sociologist Harry Edwards contends that young black athletes have been exploited by some college recruiters.
contentious	quarrelsome	We heard loud and contentious noises in the next room.
contest	dispute	The defeated candidate attempted to contest the election results.
context	writings preceding and following the passage quoted	Because these lines are taken out of context, they do not convey the message the author intended.
contiguous	adjacent to; touching upon	The two countries are contiguous for a few miles; then they are separated by the gulf.
continence	self-restraint; sexual chastity	She vowed to lead a life of continence.
contingent	conditional	The continuation of this contract is contingent on the quality of your first output.
contortions	twistings; distortions	As the effects of the opiate wore away, the contortions of the patient became more violent and demonstrated how much pain she was enduring.
contraband	illegal trade; smuggling; smuggled goods	The coast guard tries to prevent contraband in U.S. waters.
contravene	contradict; oppose: infringe on or transgress	Mr. Barrett did not expect his frail daughter Elizabeth to contravene his will by eloping with Robert Browning.
contrite	penitent	Her contrite tears did not influence the judge when he imposed sentence.
contrived	forced; artificial; not spontaneous	Feeling ill at ease with his new in-laws; James made a few contrived attempts at conversation and then retreated into silence.
controvert	oppose with arguments; contradict	To controvert your theory will require much time but it is essential that we disprove it.
contumacious	disobedient; resisting authority	The contumacious mob shouted defiantly at the police.
contusion	bruise	She was treated for contusions and abrasions.
conundrum	riddle; difficult problem	During the long car ride, she invented conundrums to entertain the children.
convene	assemble	Because much is needed legislation had to be enacted, the governor ordered the legislature to convene in special session by January 15.
convention	social or moral custom; established practice	Flying in the face of convention, George Sand (Amandine Dudevant) shocked her contemporaries by taking lovers and wearing men's clothes.
conventional	ordinary; typical	His conventional upbringing left him wholly unprepared for his wife's eccentric family.
converge	come together	Marchers converged on Washington for the great Save Our Cities-Save Our Children March.
conversant	familiar with	The lawyer is conversant with all the evidence.
converse	opposite	The inevitable converse of peace is not war but annihilation.
convert	one who has adopted a different religion or opinion	On his trip to Japan, though the President spoke at length about the merits of American automobiles, he made few converts to his beliefs.
convex	curving outward	He polished the convex lens of his telescope.
conveyance	vehicle; transfer	During the transit strike, commuters used various kinds of conveyances.
conviction	strongly held belief	Nothing could shake his conviction that she was innocent.
dais	raised platform for guests of honor	When he approached the dais, he was greeted by cheers from the people who had come to honor him.
dally	trifle with; procrastinate	Laertes told Ophelia that Hamlet could only dally with her affections.
dank	damp	The walls of the dungeon were dank and slimy.
dapper	neat and trim	In "The Odd Couple," Tony Randall played Felix Unger, an excessively dapper soul who could not stand to have a hair out of place.
dappled	spotted	The sunlight filtering though the screens created a dappled effect on the wall.
daub	smear (as with paint)	From the way he daubed his paint on the canvas, I could tell he knew nothing of oils.
daunt	intimidate	Your threats cannot daunt me.
dauntless	bold	Despite the dangerous nature of the undertaking, the dauntless soldier volunteered for the assignment.
dawdle	loiter; waste time	Inasmuch as we must meet a deadline, do not dawdle over this work.
deadlock	standstill; stalemate	The negotiations had reached a deadlock.
deadpan	wooden; impassive	We wanted to see how long he could maintain his deadpan expression.
dearth	scarcity	The dearth of skilled labor compelled the employers to open trade schools.
debacle	breaking up; downfall	This debacle in the government can only result in anarchy.
debase	reduce to lower state	Do not debase youself by becoming maudlin.
debauch	corrupt; make intemperate	A vicious newspaper can debauch public ideals.
debilitate	weaken; enfeeble	Overindulgence debilitates character as well as physical stamina.
debonair	friendly; aiming to please	The debonair youth was liked by all who met him, because of his cheerful and obliging manner.
debris	rubble	A full year after the earthquake in Mexico City, workers were still carting away the debris.
debunk	expose as false, exaggerated, worthless, etc.; ridicule	Pointing out that he conhsistently had voted afainst strenghtening antipollution legislation, reporters debunked the candidate's claim that he was a fervent environmentalist.
debutante	yound woman making formal entrance into society	As a debutante, she was often mentioned in the society columns of the newspapers.
decadence	decay	The moral decadence of the people was reflected in the lewd literature of the period.
decant	pour off gently	Be sure to decant this wine before serving it.
decapitate	behead	They did not hang Lady Jane Grey; they decapitated her.
decelerate	slow down	Seeing the emergency blinkers in the road ahead, he decelerated quickly.
deciduous	falling off, as of leaves	The oak is a deciduous tree.
decimate	kill, usually one out of ten	We do more to decimate our population in automobile accidents than we do in war.
decipher	decode	I could not decipher the doctor's handwriting.
declivity	downward slope	The children loved to ski down the declivity.
decollete	having a low-cut neckline	Fashion decrees that evening gowns be decollete this season; bare shoulders are again the vogue.
decomposition	decay	Despite the body's advanced state of decomposition, the police were able to identify the murdered man.
decorum	propriety; seemliness	Shocked by the unruly behavior, the teacher criticized the class for its lack of decorum.
decoy	lure or bait	The wild ducks were not fooled by the decoy.
decrepitude	state of collagse caused by illness or old age	I was unprepared for the state of decrepitude in which I had found my old friend; he seemed to have aged twenty years in six months.
decry	express strong disapproval of ; disparage	The founder of the Children's Defense Fund, Marian Wright Edelman, strongly decries the lack of financial and moral support for children in America today.
deducible	derived byreasoning	If we accept your premise, your conclusions are easily deducible.
deface	mar; disfigure	If you deface a library book, you will have to pay a hefty fine.
defamation	harming a person's reputation	Such defamation of character may result in a slander suit.
default	failure to do	As a result of her husband's failure to appear in court, she was granted a divorce by default.
defeatist	resigned to defeat; accepting defeat as a natural outcome	If you maintain your defeatist attitude, you will never succeed.
defection	desertion	The children, who had made him an idol, were hurt most by his defection from our cause.
deference	courteous regard for another's wish	In deference to his desires, the employers granted him a holiday.
defile	pollute; profane	The hoodlums defiled the church with their scurrilous writing.
definitive	most reliable or complee	Carl Sandburg's Abraham Lincoln may be regarded as the definitive work on the life of the Great Emancipator.
deflect	turn aside	His life was saved when his cigarette case deflected the bullet.
defoliate	destroy leaves	In Vietnam the army made extensive use of chemical agents to defoliate the woodlands.
defray	provide ofr the payment of	Her employer offered to defray the costs of her postgraduate education.
defrock	to strip a priest or minister of church authority	We knew the minister had violated church regulations, but we had not realized his offense was serious enough to cause him to be defrocked.
deft	neat; skillful	The deft waiter uncorked the champagne without spilling a drop.
defunct	dead; no longer in use or existence	The lawyers sought to examine the books of the defunct corporation.
degenerate	become worse; deteriorate	As the fight dragged on, the champion's style degenerated until he could barely keep on his feet.
degraded	lowered in rank; debased	The degraded wretch spoke only of his past glories and honors.
dehydrate	remove water from; dry out	Vigorous dancing quickly dehydrates the body; between dances, be sure to drink more water than normal.
deify	turn into a god; idolize	Admire the rock star all you want; just don't deify him.
deign	condescend	He felt that he would debase himself if he deigned to answer his critics.
delete	erase; strike out	If you delete this paragraph, the composition will have more appeal.
deleterious	harmful	Workers in nuclear research must avoid the deleterious effects of radioactive substances.
deliberate	consider; ponder; unhurried	Offered the new job, she asked for time to deliberate before she made her decision.
delineate	portray	He is weakest when he attempts to delineate character.
delirium	mental disorder marked by confusion	The drunkard in his delirium saw strange animals.
delta	flat plain of mud or sand between branches of a river	His dissertation discussed the effect of intermittent flooding on the fertility of the Nile delta.
delude	deceive	Do not delude yourself into believing that he will relent.
deluge	flood; rush	When we advertised the position, we received a deluge of applications.
delusion	false belief; hallucination	This scheme is a snare and a delusion.
delusive	deceptive; raising vain hopes	Do not raise your hopes on the basis of his delusive promises.
delve	dig; investigate	delving into old books and manuscripts is part of a researcher's job.
demagogue	person who appeals to people's prejudice; false leader	He was accused of being a demogogue because he made promises that aroused futile hopes in his listeners.
demean	degrade; humiliate	He felt that he would demean himself if he replied to the scurrilous letter.
demeanor	behavior; bearing	His sober demeanor quieted the noisy revelers.
demented	insane	She became increasingly demented and had to be hospitalized.
demise	death	Upon the demise of the dictator, a bitter dispute about succession to power developed.
demographic	related to population balance	In conducting a survey, one should take into account demographic trends in the region.
demolition	destruction	One of the major aims of the air force was the complete demolition of all means of transportation by the bombing of rail lines and the terminals.
demoniac	fiendish	The Spanish Inquisition devised many demoniac means of torture.
demotic	pertaining to the people	He lamented the passing of aristocratic society and maintained that a demotic society would lower the nation's standards.
demur	delay; object	To demur at this time will only worsen the already serious situation; now is the time for action.
demure	grave; serius; coy	She was demure and reserved.
denigrate	blacken	All attempts to denigrate the character of our late President have failed; the people still love him and cherish his memory.
denizen	inhabitant of	Ghosts are denizens of the land of the dead who return to earth.
denotation	meaning; distinguishing by name	A dictionary will always give us the denotation of a word; frequently, it will always give us its connotation.
denouement	outcome; final development of the plot of a play or other literary work	The play was childishly written; the denouement was obvious to sophisticated theatergoers as early as the middle of the first act.
denounce	condemn; critcize	The reform candidate denounced the corrupt city officers for having betrayed the public's trust.
depict	portray	In this book, the author depicts the slave owners as kind and benevolent masters.
deplete	reduce; exhaust	We must wait until we deplete our present inventory before we order replacements.
deplicity	double-dealing; hypocrisy	People were shocked and dismayed when they learned of his duplicity in this affair, as he had always seemed honest and straightforward.
deplore	regret	Although I deplore the vulgarity of your language, I defend your right to express yourself freely.
deploy	move troops so that the battle line is extended at the expense of depth	The general ordered the battalion to deploy in order to meet the offensive of the enemy.
depose	dethrone; remove form office	The army attempted to depose the king and set up a military government.
deposition	testimony under oath	He made his deposition in the judge's chamber.
depravity	corruption; wickedness	The depravity of the tyrant's behavior shocked us all.
deprecate	express disapproval of; protest against; belittle	A firm believer in old-fashioned courtesy, Miss Post deprecated the modern tendency to address new acquaintances by their first names.
depreciate	lessen in value	If you neglect this properly, it will depreciate.
depredation	plundering	After the depredations of the invaders, the people were penniless.
deranged	insane	He had to be institutionalized because he was deranged.
derelict	neglectful of duty; abandoned	The corporal who fell asleep while on watch was thrown into the guardhouse for being derelic in his duty.
deride	scoff at	The people derided his grandiose schemes.
derision	ridicule	They greeted his proposal with derision and refused to consider it seriously.
derivative	unoriginal; obtained from another source	Although her early poetry was clearly derivative in nature, the critics thought she had promise and eventually would find her own voice.
dermatologist	one who studies the skin and its diseases	I advise you to consult a dermatologist about your acne.
derogatory	expressing a low opinion	I resent your derogatory remarks.
descry	catch sight of	In the distance, we could barely descry the enemy vessels.
desecrate	profane; violate the sanctity of	The soldiers desecrated the temple.
desiccate	dry up	A tour of this smokehouse will give you an idea of how the pioneers used to desiccate food in order to preserve it.
desolate	rob of joy; lay waste to; forsake	The bandits desolated the countryside, burning farms and carrying off the harvest.
desperado	reckless outlaw	Butch Cassidy was a bold desperado with a price on his head.
despicable	contemptible	Your despicable remarks call for no reply.
despise	scorn	I despise your attempts at a reconciliation at this time and refuse to meet you.
despoil	plunder	If you do not yield, I am afraid the enemy will despoil the countryside.
despondent	depressed; gloomy	To the dismay of his parents, he became more and more depondent every day.
despotism	tyranny	The people rebelled against the despotism of the king.
destitute	extremely poor	The costs of the father's illness left the family destitute.
desultory	aimless; haphazard; digressing at random	In prison Malcolm X set himself the task of reading straight through the dictionary; to him reading was purposeful, not desultory.
detached	emotionally removed; calm and objective; indifferent	A psychoanalyst must maintain a detached point of view and stay uninvolved with her patients' perssonal lives.
determinate	having a fixed order of procedure; invariable	At the royal wedding, the procession of the nobles followed a determinate order of precedence.
deterrent	something that discourages; hindrance	Does the threat of capital punishment serve as a deterrent to potential killers?
detonation	explosion	The detonation of the bomb could be heard miles away.
detraction	slandering; aspersion	He is offended by your frequent detractions of his ability as a leader.
detrimental	harmful; damaging	Your acceptance of her support will ultimately prove detrimental rather than helpful to your cause.
deviate	turn away from	Do not deviate from the truth; you must face the facts.
devious	going astray; erratic	Your devious behavior in this matter puzzles me since you are usually direct and straightforward.
devoid	lacking	He was devoid of any personal desire for gain in his endeavor to secure improvement in the community.
devolve	deputize; pass to others	It devolved upon us, the survivors, to arrange peace terms with the enemy.
devotee	enthusiastic follower	A devotee of the opera, he bought season tickets every year.
devout	pious	The devout man prayed daily.
dexterous	skillful	The magician was so dexterous that we could not follow his movements as he performed his tricks.
diabolical	devilish	This scheme is so diabolical that I must reject it.
diadem	crown	The king's diadem was on display at the museum.
dialectic	art of debate	I am not skilled in dialectic and therefore, cannot answer your arguments as forcefully as I wish.
diaphanous	sheer; transparent	They saw the burglar clearly through the diaphanous curtain.
diatribe	bitter scolding; invective	During the lengthy diatribe delivered by his opponent he remained calm and self-controlled.
dichotomy	branching into two parts	The dichotomy of our legislative system provides us with many safeguards.
dictum	arthoritative and weighty statement	She repeated the statement as though it were the dictum of the most expert worker in the group.
didactic	teaching; instructional; preaching or moralizing	The didactic qualities of his poetry overshadow its literary qualities; the lesson he teaches is more memorable than the lines.
die	device for stamping or impressing; mold	In coining pennies, workers at the old mint squeezed sheets of softened copper between two dies.
diffidence	shyness	You must overcome your diffidence if you intend to become a salesperson.
diffusion	wordiness; spreading in all directions like a gas	Your composition suffers from a diffusion of ideas; try to be more compact.
digression	wandering away from the subject	Nobody minded when Professor Renoir's lectures wandered away from their offical theme; his digressions were always more fascinating than the topic of the day.
dilapidated	ruined because of neglect	We felt that the dilapidated building needed several coats of paint.
dilate	expand	In the dark, the pupils of your eyes dilate.
dilatory	delaying	Your dilatory tactics may compel me to cancel the contract.
dilemma	problem; choice of two unsatisfactory alternatives	In this dilemma, he knew no one to whom he could turn for advice.
dilettante	aimless follower of the arts; amateur; dabbler	He was not serious in his painting; he was rather a dilettante.
diligence	steadiness of effort; persisten hard work	Her employers were greatly impressed by her diligence and offered her a partnership in the firm.
dilute	make less concentrated; reduce in strength	She preferred her coffee diluted with milk.
diminution	lessening; reduction in size	The blockaders hoped to achieve victory as soon as the diminution of the enemy's supplies became serious.
din	continued loud noise	The din of the jackhammers outside the classroom window drowned out the lecturer's voice.
dinghy	small boat (often ship's boat)	In the film Lifeboat, an ill-assorted group of passengers from a sunken ocean liner are marooned at sea in a dinghy.
dingy	dull; not fresh; cheerless	Refusing to be depressed by her dingy studio apartment, Bea spent the weekend polishing the floors and windows and hanging bright posters on the walls.
dint	means; effort	By dint of much hard work, the volunteers were able to control the raging forest fire.
diorama	like-size, three-dimensional scene from nature or history	Because they dramatically pose actual stuffed animals against realistic painted landscapes, the dioramas at the Museum of Natural History particularly impress high school biology students.
dire	disastrous	People ignored her dire predictions of an approaching depression.
dirge	lament with music	The funeral dirge stirred us to tears.
disabuse	correct a false impression; undeceive	I will attempt to diabuse you of your impression of my client's guilt; I know he is innocent.
disaffected	disloyal	Once the most loyal of Gorbachev's supporters, Shverdnaze found himself becoming increasingly disaffected.
disapprobation	disapproval; condemnation	The conservative father viewed his daughter's radical boyfriend with disapprobation.
disarray	a disorderly or untidy state	After the New Year's party, the once orderly house was in total disarray.
disavowal	denial; disclaiming	His disavowal of his part in the conspiracy was not believed by the jury.
disband	dissolve; disperse	The chess club disbanded after its disastrous initial season.
disburse	pay out	When you disburse money on the company's behalf, be sure to get a receipt.
discernible	distinguishable; perceivable	The ships in the harbor were not discernible in the fog.
discerning	mentally quick and observant; having insight	Because he was considered the most discerning member of the firm, he was assigned the most difficult cases.
disclaim	disown; renounce claim to	If I grant you this previlege, will you disclaim all other rights?
disclose	reveal	Although competitors offered him bribes, he refused to disclose any information about his company's forthcoming product.
discombobulated	confused; discomposed	The novice square dancer became so discombobulated that he wandered into wrong set.
discomfit	put to rout; defeat; disconcert	This ruse will discomfit the enemy.
disconcert	confuse; upset; embarrass	The lawyer was disconcerted by the evidence produced by her adversary.
disconcolate	sad	The death of his wife left him disconsolate.
discordant	inharmonious; conflicting	She tried to unite the discordant factions.
discount	disregard	Be prepared to discount what he has to say about his ex-wife.
discourse	formal disscussion; conversation	The young Plato was drawn to the Agora to hear the philosophical discourse of Socrates and his followers.
discredit	defame; destroy confidence in; disbelieve	The campaign was highly negative in tone; each candidate tried to discredit the other.
discrepancy	lack of consistency; difference	The police noticed some discrepancies in his description of the crime and did not believe him.
discrete	separate; unconnected	The universe is composed of discrete bodies.
discretion	prudence; ability to adjust actions to circumstances	Use your discretion in this matter and do not discuss it with anyone.
discrimination	ability to see differences; prejudice	They feared he lacked sufficient discrimination to judge complex works of modern art.
discursive	digressing; rambling	They were annoyed and bored by her discursive remarks.
disdain	treat with scorn or contempt	You make enemies of all you disdain.
disembark	go ashore; unload cargo from a ship	Before the passengers could disembark, they had to pick up their passports from the ship's purser.
disenfranchise	deprive of a civil right	The imposition if the poll tax effectively disenfranchised poor Southern blacks, who lost their right to vote.
disengage	uncouple; separate; disconnect	A standard movie routine involves the hero's desperate attempt to disengage a railroad car from a moving train.
disfigure	mar the appearance of; spoil	An ugly frown disfigured his normally pleasant face.
disgorge	surrender something; efect; vomit	Unwilling to disgorge the cash he had stolen from the pension fund, the embezzler tried to run away.
disgruntle	make discontented	The passengers were disgruntled by the numerous delays.
dishearten	discourage	His failure to pass the bar exam disheartened him.
disheveled	untidy	Your disheveled appearance will hurt your chances in this interview.
disinclination	unwilingness	Some mornings I feel a great disinclination to get out of bed.
disingenuous	not naive; sophisticated	Although he was young, his remarks indicated that he was disingenous.
disinter	dig up; unearth	They disinterred the body and held an autopsy.
disinterested	unprejudiced	The only disinterested person in the room was the judge.
disjointed	disconnected	His remarks were so disjointed that we could not follow his reasoning.
dislodge	remove (forcible)	Thrusting her fist up under the choking man's lower ribs, Margaret used the Heimlich maneuver to dislodge the food caught in this throat.
dismantle	take apart	When the show closed, they dismantled the scenery before restoring it.
dismember	cut into small parts	When the Austrian Empire was dismembered, several new countries were established.
dismiss	eliminate from consideration; reject	Believing in John's love for her, she dismissed the notion that he might be unfaithful.
disparage	belittle	Do not disparage anyone's contribution; these little gifts add up to large sums.
disparate	basically different; unrelated	It is difficult, if not impossible, to organize these disparate elements into a coherent whole.
disparity	difference; condition of inequality	The disparity in their ages made no difference at all.
dispassionate	calm; impartial	In a dispassionate analysis of the problem, he carefully examined the causes of the conflict and proceeded to suggest suitable remedies.
dispatch	speediness; prompt execution; message sent with all due speed	Young Napoleon defeated the enemy with all possible dispatch; he then sent a dispatch to headquarters, informing his commander of the great victory.
dispel	scatter; drive away; cause to vanish	The bright sunlight eventually dispelled the morning mist.
disperse	scatter	The police fired tear gas into crowd to disperse the protesters.
dispirited	lacking in spirit	The coach used all the tricks at his command to buoy up the enthusiasm of his team, which I had become dispirited at the loss of the star player.
disport	amuse	The popularity of Florida as a winter resort is constantly increasing; each year, thousands more disport themselves at Miami and Palm Beach.
disputatious	argumentative; fond of argument	People avoided discussing contemporary problems with him because of his disputatious manner.
disquisition	a formal systematic inquiry; an explanation of the results of a formal inquiry	In his disquisition, he outlined the steps he had taken in reaching his conclusions.
dissection	analysis; cutting apart in order to examine	The dissection of frogs on the laboratory is particularly unpleasant to some students.
dissemble	disguise; pretend	Even though John tried to dissemble his motive for taking modern dance, we all knew there not to dance but to meet girls.
disseminate	scatter (like seeds)	The invention of the radio helped propagandists to disseminate their favorite doctrines very easily.
dissent	disagree	In a landmark Supreme Court decision, Justice Marshall dissented from the majority opinion.
dissertation	formal essay	In order to earn a graduate degree from many of our universities, a candidate is frequently required to prepare a dissertation on some scholarly subject.
dissident	dissenting; rebellious	In the purge that followed the student demonstrations at Tianamen Square, the government hunted down the dissident students and their supporters.
dissimulate	pretend; conceal by feigning	She tried to dissimulate her grief by her exuberant attitude.
dissipate	squander	The young man quickly dissipated his inheritance and was soon broke.
dissolution	disintegration; looseness in morals	The profligacy and dissolution of life in Caligula's Rome appall some historians.
dissonance	discord	Some contemporary musicians deliberately use dissonance to achieve certain effects.
dissuade	advise against	He could not dissuade his friend from joining the conspirators.
distant	reserved or aloof; cold in manner	His distant greeting made me feel unwelcome from the start.
distend	expand;swell out	I can tell when he is under stress by the way the veins distend on his forehead.
distill	purify; refine; concentrate	A moonshiner distills mash into whiskey; an epigrammatist distills thoughts into quips.
distortion	twisting out of shape	It is difficult to believe the newspaper accounts of this event because of the distortions and exaggerations of the reporters.
distrait	absentminded	Because of his concentration on the problem, the professor often appeared distrait and unconcerned about routine.
distraught	upset; distracted by anxiety	The distraught parents frantically searched the ravine for their lost child.
diurnal	daily	A farmer cannot neglect his diurnal tasks at any time; cows, for example, must be milked regularly.
diva	operatic singer; prima donna	Although world famous as a diva, she did not indulge in fits of temerament.
diverge	vary; go in different directionsfrom the same point	The spokes of the wheel diverge from the hub.
divergent	differing; deviating	The two witnesses presented the jury with remarkably divergent accounts of the same epipode.
diverse	differing in some characteristics; various	There are diverse ways of approaching this problem.
diversion	act of turning aside; pastime	After studying for several hours, he needed a diversion from work.
diversity	variety; dissimilitude	The diversity of colleges in this country indicates that many levels of ability are being served.
divest	strip; deprive	He was divested of his power to act and could no longer govern.
divine	perceive intuitively; foresee the future	Nothing infuriated Tom more than Aunt Polly's ability to divine when he was not telling the truth.
divulge	reveal	I will not tell you this news because I am sure you will divulge it prematurely.
docile	obedient; easily managed	As docile as he seems today, that old lion was once a ferocious, snarling beast.
docket	program asfor trial; book where such entries are made	The case of Smith v. Jones was entered in the docket for July 15.
doctrinaire	unable to compromise about points of doctrine; dogmatic; unyielding	Weng had hoped that the student-led democracy movement might bring about change in China, but the repressive response of the doctrinaire hard-liners crushed his dreams of democracy.
document	provide written evidence	She kept all the receipts from her business trip in order to document her expenses for the firm.
doddering	shaky; infirm from old age	Although he is not as yet a doddering and senile old man, his ideas and opinions no longer can merit the respect we gave them years ago.
doff	take off	A gentleman used to doff his hat to a lady.
dogged	determined;stubborn	Les Miserables tells of Inspector Javert's long, dogged pursuit of the criminal Jean Valjean.
doggerel	poorverse	Although we find occasional snatches of genuine poetry in her work, most of her writing is mere doggerel.
dogmatic	positive; arbitrary	Do not be so dogmatic about that statement; it can be easily refuted.
doldrums	blues; listlessness; slack period	Once the excitement of meeting her deadline was over, she found herself in the doldrums.
dolorous	sorrowfrl	He found the dolorous lamentations of the bereaved family emotionally disturbing and he left as quickly as he could.
dolt	stupid person	I thought I was talking to a mature audience; instead, I find myself addressing a pack of dolts.
domicile	home	Althoughhis legal domicile was in New York City, his work kept him away from his residence for many years.
domineer	rule over tyrannically	Students prefer teachers who guide, not ones who domineer.
don	put on	When Clark Kent had to don his Superman outfit, he changed clothes in a convenient phone booth.
dormant	sleeping; lethargic; torpid	Sometimes dormant talents in our friends surprise those of us who never realize how gifted our acquaintances really are.
dormer	window projecting from roof	In remodeling the attic into a bedroom, we decided that we needed to put in dormers to provide sufficient ventilation for the new room.
dorsal	relating to the back of an animal	A shark may be identified by its dorsal fin, which projects above the surface of the ocean.
dossier	file of documents on a subject	Ordered by J. Edgar Hoover to investigate the senator, the FBI compiled a complete dossier.
dotage	senility	In his dotage, the old man bored us with long tales of events in his childhood.
dote	be excessively fond of; show signs of mental decline	Not only grandmothers bore you with stories about their brilliant grandchildren; grandfathers dote on the littel rascals, too.
dour	sullen; stubborn	The man was dour abd taciturn.
douse	plunge into water; drench; extinguish	They doused each other with hoses and balloons.
dowdy	slovenly; untidy	She tried to change her dowdy image by buying a fashionable new wardrobe.
downcast	disheartened; sad	Cheerful and optimistic by nature, Beth was never downcast despite the difficulties she faced.
drab	dull; lacking color; cheerless	The Dutch woman's drab winter coat contrasted with the distinctive, colorful native costume she wore beneath it.
dregs	sediment; worthless residue	David poured the wine carefully to avoid stirring up the dregs.
droll	queer and amusing	He was a popular guest because his droll anecdotes were always entertaining.
drone	idle person; male bee	Content to let his wife support him, the would-be writer was in reality nothing but a drone.
drone	talk dully; buzz or murmur like a bee	On a gorgeous day, who wants to be stuck in a classroom listening to the teacher drone?
dross	waste matter; worhtless impurities	Many methods have been devised to separate the valuable metal from the dross.
drudgery	menial work	Cinderella's fairy godmother rescued her from a life of drudgery.
dubious	doubtful	He has the dubious distinction of being the lowest man in his class.
ductility	malleability; flexibility; ability to be drawn out	Copper wire has many industrial uses because of its extreme ductility.
dulcet	sweet sounding	The dulcet sounds of the birds at dawn were soon drowned out by the roar of traffic passing our motel.
dupe	someone easily fooled	While the gullible Watson often was made a dupe by unscrupulous parties, Sherlock Holmes was far more difficult to fool.
duress	forcible restraint, especially unlawfully	The hostages were held under duress until the prisoners' demands were met.
dutiful	respectful; obedient	The dutiful child grew up to be a conscientious adult aware of his civic obligations.
dwindle	shrink; reduce	They spent so much money that their funds dwindled to nothing.
dynamic	active; efficient	A dynamic government is necessary to meet the demands of a changing society.
dyspeptic	suffering from indigestion	All the talk about rich food made him feel dyspeptic.
earthy	unrefined; coarse	His earthy remarks often embarrassed the women in the audience.
ebb	recede; lessen	His fortunes began to ebb during the recession.
ebullient	showing excitement; overflowing with enthusiasm	His ebullient nature could not be repressed.
eccentric	odd; whimsical; irregular	The comet passed close by the earth in its eccentric orbit.
eccentricity	oddity; idiosyncrasy	Some of his friends tried to account for his rudeness to strangers as the eccentricity of genius.
ecclesiastic	pertaining to the church	The minister donned his ecclesiastic garb and walked to the pulpit.
eclectic	selective; composed of elements drawn from disparate sources	His style of interior decoration was eclectic: bits and pieces of furnishings from widely divergent periods, strikingly juxtaposed to create a unique color.
eclipse	darken; extinguish; surpass	The new stock market high eclipsed the previous record set in 1985.
ecologist	person concerned with the interrelationship between living organisms and their environment	The ecologist was concerned that the new dam would upset the natural balance of the creatures living in Glen Canyon.
economy	efficiency or conciseness in using something	Reading the epigrams of Pope, I admire the economy of his verse: in few words he conveys worlds of meaning.
ecstasy	rapture, joy; any overpowering emotion	The announcement that the war had ended brought on an ecstasy that resulted in many uncontrolled celebrations.
eddy	swirling current of water, air, etc	The water in the tide pool was still, except for an occasional eddy.
edify	instruct; correct morally	Although his purpose was to edify and not to entertain his audience, many of his listeners were amused and not enlightened.
eerie	weird	In that eerie setting, it was easy to believe in ghosts and other supernatural beings.
efface	rub out	The coin had been handled so many times that its data had been effaced.
effectual	efficient	If we are to succeed, we must seek effectual means of securing our goals.
effeminate	having womanly traits	His voice was high-pitched and effeminate.
effervescence	inner excitement; exuberance	Nothing depressed her for long; her natural effervescence soon reasserted itself.
effete	worn out; exhausted; barren	The literature of the age reflected the effete condition of the writers; no new ideas were forthcoming.
efficacy	power to produce desired effect	The efficacy of this drug depends on the regularity of the dosage.
effigy	dummy	The mob showed its irritation by hanging the judge in effigy.
effluvium	noxious smell	Air pollution has become a serious problem in our major cities; the effluvium and the poisons in the air are hazards to life.
effrontery	shameless boldness	She had the effrontery to insult the guest.
effusion	pouring forth	The critics objected to her literary effusion because it was too flowery.
effusive	pouring forth; gushing	Her effusive manner of greeting her friends finally began to irritate them.
egoism	excessive interest in one's self; belief that one should be interested in one's self rather than in	others His egoism prevented him from seeing the needs of his colleagues.
egotism	conceit; vanity	She thought so much of herself that we found her egotism unwarranted and irritating.
egregious	notorious; conspicuously bad; shocking	She was an egregious liar; we all knew better than to believe a word she said.
egress	exit	Barnum's sign "To the Egress" fooled many people who thought they were going to see an animal and instead found themselves in the street.
ejaculation	exclamation	He could not repress an ejaculation of surprise when he heard the news.
elaboration	addition of details; intricacy	Tell what happened simply, without any elaboration.
elated	overjoyed; in high spirits	Grinning from ear to ear, Bonnie Blair was clearly elated by her Olympic victory.
elegy	poem or song expressing lamentation	On the death of Edward King, Milton composed the elegy "Lycidas".
elicit	draw out by discussion	The detectives tried to elicit where he had hidden his loot.
elixir	cure-all; something invigorating	The news of her chance to go abroad acted on her like an elixir.
ellipsis	omission of words from a text	Sometimes an ellipsis can lead to a dangling modifier, as in the sentence "Once dressed, you should refrigerate the potato salad.
elliptical	oval; ambiguous, either purposely or because key words have been left out	An elliptical billiad ball wobbles because it is not perfectly round; an elliptical remark baffles because it is not perfectly clear.
eloquence	expressiveness; persuasive speech	The crowds were stirred by Martin Luther King's eloquence.
elucidate	explain; enlighten	He was called upon to elucidate the disputed points in his article.
elusive	evasive; baffling; hard to grasp	His elusive dreams of wealth were costly to those of his friends who supported him financially.
elysian	relating to paradise; blissful	An afternoon sail on the bay was for her an elysian journey.
emaciated	thin and wasted	His long period of starvation had left him emaciated.
emanate	issue forth	A strong odor of sulfur emanated from the spring.
emancipate	set free	At first, the attempts of the Abolitioninst to emancipate the slaves were unpopular in New England as well as in the South.
embargo	ban on commerce or other activity	As a result of the embargo, trade with colonies was at a standstill.
embark	commence; go on board a boat; begin a journey	In devoting herself to the study of gorillas, Dian Fossey embarked on a course of action that was to cost her her life.
embed	enclose; place in something	Tales of actual historical figures like King Alfred have become embedded in legends.
embellish	adorn My mother-in-law's stories about her journey from Russia made us laugh because she embellished the bare	facts of her travels with humourous acecdotes.
embezzlement	stealing	The bank teller confessed his embezzlement of the funds.
embroil	throw into confusion	He became embroiled in the heated discussion when he tried to arbitrate the dispute.
embryonic	undeveloped; rudimentary	The evil of class and race hatred must be eliminated while it is still in an embryonic state; otherwise, it may grow to dangerous proportions.
emend	correct, usually a text	The critic emended the book by retranslating several passages.
emendation	correction of errors; improvement	Please initial all the emendations you have made in this contract.
emetic	substance causing vomiting	The use of an emetic like mustard is useful in cases of poisoning.
eminent	high; lofty	After his appointment to this emiment position, he seldom had time for his former friends.
emissary	agent; messenger	The secretary of State was sent as the President's special emissary to the conference on disarmament.
emollient	soothing or softening remedy	He applied an emollient to the inflamed area.
emolument	salary; compensation	In addition to the emolument this position offers, you must consider the social prestige it carries with it.
empathy	ability to identify with another's feelings, ideas, etc	What made Ann such a fine counselor was her empathy, her ability to put herself in her client's place and feel his emotions as if they were her own.
empirical	based on experience	He distrusted hunches and intuitive flashes; he placed his reliance entirely on empirical data.
emulate	rival; imitate	As long as our political leaders emulate the virtues of the great leaders of this country, we shall flourish.
enamored	in love	Narcissus became enamored of his own beauty.
enclave	territory enclosed within an alien land	The Vatican is an independent enclave in Italy.
encomiastic	praising; eulogistic	Some critics believe that his encomiastic statements about Napoleon were inspired by his desire for material advancement rather than by an honest belief in the Emperor's genius.
encomium	high praise; eulogy	Uneasy with the encomiums expressed by his supporters, Tolkien felt unworthy of such high praise.
encompass	surround	Although we were encompassed by enemy forces, we were cheerful for we were well stocked and could withstand a siege until our allies joined us.
encroachment	gradual intrusion	The encroachment of the factories upon the neighborhood lowered the value of the real estate.
encumber	burden	Some people encumber themselves with too much luggage, when they take short trips.
endearment	fond word or act	Your gifts and endearments cannot make me forget your earlier insolence.
endemic	prevailinig among a specific group of people or in a specific are or country	This disease is endemic in this part of the world; more than 80 percent of the population are at one time or another affected by it.
endorse	approve; support	Everyone waited to see which one of the rival candidates for the city council the mayor would endorse.
endue	provide with some quality; endow	He was endued with a lion's courage.
enduring	lasting; surviving	Keats believed in the enduring power of great art, which outlast its creator's brief lives.
energize	invigorate; make forceful and active	Rather than exhausting Maggie, dancing energized her.
enervate	weaken	She was slow to recover from her illness; even a short walk to the window evervated her.
enfranchise	admit to the rights of citizenship (especially the right to vote)	Although blacks were enfranchised shortly after the Civil War, women did not receive the right to vote until 1920.
engage	attract; hire; pledge oneself; confront	"Your case has engaged my interest, my lord," said Holmes, "You many engage my services".
engender	cause; produce	To receive praise for real accomplishments engenders self-confidence in a child.
engross	occupy fully	John was so engrossed in his studies that he did not hear his mother call.
enhance	advance; improve	Your chances for promotion in this department will be enhanced if you take some more courses in evening school.
enigma	puzzle	Depite all attempts to decipher the code, it remained an enigma.
enigmatic	obscure; puzzling	Many have sought to fathom the enigmatic smile of the Mona Lisa.
enjoin	command; order; forbid	The owners of the company asked the court to enjoin the union from picketing the plant.
enmity	ill will; hatred	At Camp David President Carter labored to bring an end to the enmity that prevented Egypt and Israel from living in peace.
ennui	boredom	The monotonous routine of hopital life induced a feeling of ennui which made him moody and irritable.
enormity	hugeness (in a bad sense)	He did not realize the enormity of his crime until he saw what suffering he had caused.
enrapture	please intensely	The audience was enraptured by the freshness of the voices and the excellent orchestration.
ensconce	settle comfortably	The parents thought that their children were ensconced safely in the private school and decided to leave for Europe.
ensue	follow	The evils that ensued were the direct result of the miscalculations of the leaders.
enthrall	capture; enslave	From the moment he saw her picture, he was enthralled by her beauty.
entice	lure; attract; tempt	She always tried to entice her baby brother into mischief.
entity	real being	As soon as the charter was adopted, the United Nations became an entity and had to be considered as a factor in world diplomacy.
entomology	study of insects	I found entomology the least interesting part of my course in biology; studying insects bored me.
entrance	put under a spell; carry away with emotion	Shafts of sunlight on a wall could entrance her and leave her spellbound.
entreat	plead; ask earnestly	She entreated her father to let her stay out till midnight.
entree	entrance; a way in	Because of his wealth and social position, he had entree into the most exclusive circles.
entrepreneur	businessperson; contractor	Opponents of our present tax program argue that it discourages entrepreneurs from trying new fields of business activity.
enumerate	list; mention one by one	Huck hung his head in shame as Miss Watson enumerated his many flaws.
enunciate	speak distinctly	How will people understand you if you do not enunciate?
environ	enclose; surround	Paris was environed by a wall
eon	long period of time; an age	It has taken eons for our civilization to develop.
epaulet	ornament worn on the shoulder (of a uniform, etc.)	The shoulder loops on Sam Spade's trench coat are the nonmilitary counterparts of the fringed epaulets on George Washington's uniform.
ephemeral	short-lived; fleeting	The mayfly is an ephemeral creature.
epic	long heroic poem, novel, or similar work of art	Kurosawa's film Seven Samurai is an epic portraying the struggle of seven warriors to destroy a band of robbers.
epicure	connoisseur of food and drink	epicures frequent this restaurant because it features exotic wines and dishes.
epigram	witty thought or saying, usually short	Poor Richard's epigrams made Benjamin Franklin famous.
epilogue	short speech at conclusion of dramatic work	The audience was so disappointed in the play that many did not remain to hear the epilogue.
episodic	loosely connected	Though he tried to follow the plot of Gravity's Rainbow, John found the novel too episodic.
epistemologist	philosopher who studies the nature of knowledge	"What is more important, a knowledge of nature of the nature of knowledge?" the epistemologist asked the naturalist.
epitaph	inscription in memory of a dead person	In his will, he dictated the epitaph he wanted placed on his tombstone.
epithet	word or phrase characteristically used to describe a person or thing	So many kings of France were named Charles that modern students need epithets to tell them apart: Charles the Wise, for example, was someone far different from Charles the Fat.
epitome	perfect example or embodiment	Singing "I am the very model of a modern Major-General" in The Pirates of Penzance, Major-General Stanley proclaimed himself the epitome of an officer and a gentleman.
epoch	period of time	The glacial epoch lasted for thousands of years.
equable	tranquil; steady; uniform	After the hot summers and cold winters of New England, he found the climate of the West Indies equable and pleasant.
equanimity	calmness of temperament	In his later years, he could look upon the foolishness of the world with equanimity and humor.
equestrian	rider on horseback	These paths in the park are reserved for equestrians and their steeds.
equilibrium	balance	After the divorce, he needed some time to regain his equilibrium.
equine	resembling a horse	His long, bony face had an equine look to it.
equinox	period of equal days and nights; the beginning of spring and autumn	The vernal equinox is usually marked by heavy rainstorms.
equipoise	balance; balancing force; equilibrium	The high-wire acrobat used his pole as an equipose to overcome the swaying caused by the wind.
equitable	fair; impartial	I am seeking an equitable solution to this dispute, one which will be fair and acceptable to both sides.
equity	fairness; justice	Our courts guarantee equity to all.
equivocal	doubtful; ambiguous	Macbeth was misled by the equivocal statements of the witches.
equivocate	lie; mislead; attempt to conceal the truth	The audience saw through his attempts to equivocate on the subject under discussion and ridiculed his remarks.
erode	eat away	The limestone was eroded by the dripping water
erotic	pertaining to passionate love	The erotic passages in this novel should be removed as they are merely pornographic.
errant	wandering	Many a charming tale has been written about the knights-errant who helped the weak and punished the guilty during the Age of Chivalry.
erratic	odd; unpredictable	Investors become anxious when the stock market appears erratic.
erroneous	mistaken; wrong	I thought my answer was correct, but it was erroneous.
erudite	learned; scholarly	His erudite writing was difficult to read because of the many allusions which were unfamiliar to most readers.
escapade	prank; flighty conduct	The headmaster could not regard this latest escapade as a boyish joke and expelled the young man.
eschew	avoid	He tried to eschew all display of temper.
esoteric	hard to understand; known only to the chosen few	New Yorker short stories often include esoteric allusions to obscure people and events: the implication is if you are in the in-crowd, you'll get the reference; if you come from Cleveland, you won't.
espionage	spying	In order to maintain its power, the government developed a system of espionage that penetrated every hosehold.
espouse	adopt; support	She was always ready to espouse a worthy cause.
esteem	repect; value; judge	I esteem Ezra Pound both for his exciting poetry and for his acute comments on literature.
estranged	separated; alienated	The estranged wife sought a divorce.
ethereal	light; heavenly; fine	Visitors were impressed by her ethereal beauty, her delicate charm.
ethnic	relating to races	Intolerance between ethnic groups is deplorable and usually is based on lack of information.
ethnology	study of mankind	Sociology is one aspect of the science of ethnology.
ethos	underlying character of a culture, group, etc	Seeing how tenderly Spaniards treated her small daughter made author Barbara Kingsolver aware of how greatly children were valued in the Spanish ethos.
etymology	study of word parts	A knowledge of etymology can help you on many English tests.
eugenic	pertaining to the improvement of race	It is easier to apply eugenic principles to the raising of racehorses or prize cattle than t the development of human beings.
eulogistic	praising	To everyone's surprise, the speech was eulogistic rather than critical in tone.
eulogy	praise	All the eulogies of his friends could not remove the sting of the calumny heaped upon him by his enemies.
euphemism	mild expression in place of an unpleasant one	The expression "he passed away" is a euphemism for "he died".
euphony	sweet sound	Noted for its euphony even when it is spoken, the Italian language is particularly pleasing to the ear when sung.
euphoria	feeling of exaggerated (or unfounded) well-being	"Jill's been on cloud nine ever since Jacj asked her out," said Betty, dismissing her friend's euphoria.
euthanasia	mercy killing	Many people support euthanasia for terminally ill patients who wish to die.
evanescent	fleeting; vanishing	For a brief moment, the entire skyline was bathed in an orange-red hue in the evanescent rays of the sunset.
evasive	not frank; eluding	Your evasive answers convinced the judge that you were witholding important evidence.
evenhanded	impartial; fair	Do men and women receive evenhanded treatment from their teachers, or, as recent studies suggest, do teachers pay more attention to male students than to females?
evince	show clearly	When he tried to answer the questions, he evinced his ignorance of the subject matter.
evoke	call forth	He evoked much criticism by his hostile manner.
ewe	female sheep	The flock of sheep was made up of dozens of ewes, together with only a handful of rams.
exacerbate	worsen; embitter	This latest arrest will exacerbate the already existing discontent of the people and enrage them.
exacting	extremely demanding	The colonies rebelled against the exacting financial claims of the mother country.
exalt	raise in rank or dignity; praise	The actor Alec Guinness was exalted to the rank of knighthood by the Queen; he now is known as Sir Alec Guinness.
exasperate	vex	Johnny often exasperates his mother with his pranks.
excerpt	selected passage (written or musical)	The cinematic equivalent of an excerpt from a novel is a clip from a film.
exchequer	treasury	He had been Chancellor of the exchequer before his promotion to the office he now holds.
excise	cut away; cut out	When you excise the dead and dying limbs of a tree, you not only improve its appearance but also enhance its chances of bearing fruit.
excoriate	flay; abrade	These shoes are so ill-fitting that they will excoriate the feet and create blisters.
exculpate	clear from blame	He was exculpated of the crime when the real criminal confessed.
execrable	very bad	The anecdote was in execrable taste and shocked the audience.
execrate	curse; express abhorrence for	The world execrates the memory of Hitler and hopes that genocide will never again be the policy of any nation.
execute	put into effect; carry out	The choreographer wanted to see how well she could execute a pirouette.
exegesis	explanation, especially of biblical passages	I can follow your exegesis of this passage to a limited degree; some of your reasoning eludes me.
exemplary	serving as a model; outstanding	Her exemplary behavior was praised at commencement.
exemplify	show by example; furnish an example	Three-time winner of the Super Bowl, Joe Montana exemplifies the ideal quarterback.
exertion	effort; expenditure of much physical work	The exertion involved in unscrewing the rusty bolt left her exhausted.
exhort	urge	The evangelist will exhort all sinners in his audience to reform.
exhume	dig out of the ground; remove from a grave	Because of the rumor that he had been poisoned, his body was exhumed in order that an autopsy might be performed.
exigency	urgent situation	In this exigency, we must look for aid from our allies.
exiguous	small; minute	Grass grew there, an exiguous outcropping among the rocks.
existential	pertaining to existence; pertaining to the philosophy of existentialism	To the existential philosopher, human reason is inadequate to explain an irrational, meaningless universe.
exodus	departure	The exodus from the hot and stuffy city was particularly noticeable on Friday evenings.
exonerate	acquit; exculpate	I am sure this letter naming the actual culprit will exonerate you.
exorbitant	excessive	The people grumbled at his exorbitant prices but paid them because he had a monopoly.
exorcise	drive our evil spirits	By incantation and prayer, the medicine man sought to exorcise the evil spirits that had taken possession of the young warrior.
exotic	not native; strange	Because of his exotic headdress, he was followed in the streets by small children who laughed at his strange appearance.
expatiate	talk at length	At this time, please give us a brief resume of your work; we shall permit you to expatiate later.
expatriate	exile; someone who has withdrawn from his native land	Henry James was an American expatriate who settled in England.
expedient	suitable; practical; politic	A pragmatic politician, he was guided by what was expedient rather than by what was ethical.
expedite	hasten	We hope you will be able to expedite delivery because of our tight schedule.
expertise	specialized knowledge; expert skill	Although she was knowledgeable in a number of fields, she was hired for her particular expertise in computer programming.
expiate	make amends for (a sin)	He tried to expiate his crimes by a full confession to the authorities.
expletive	interjection; profane oath	The sergeant's remarks were filled with expletives that offended the new recruits.
explicate	explain; interpret; clarify	Harry Levin explicated James Joyce's novels with such clarity that even Finnegan's Wake seemed comprehensible to his students.
explicit	totally clear; definite; outspoken	Don't just hint around that you're dissatisfied: be explicit about what's bugging you.
exploit	deed or action, particularly a brave deed	Raoul Wallenberg was noted for his exploits in rescuing Jews from Hitler's forces.
exploit	make use of, sometimes unjustly	Caesar Chavez fought attempts to exploit migrant farmworkers in California.
expository	explanatory; serving to explain	The mannual that came with my VCR was no masterpiece of expository prose: its explanations were so garbled that I couldn't even figure out how to rewind a tape.
expostulation	protest; remonstrance	Despite the teacher's scoldings and expostulations, the class remained unruly.
exposure	risk, particularly of being exposed to disease or to the elements; unmasking; act of laying	something open Exposure to sun and wind had dried out her hair and weathered her face.
expunge	cancel; remove	If you behave, I will expunge this notation from your record.
expurgate	clean; remove offensive parts of a book	The editors felt that certain passages in the book had to be expurgated before it could be used in the classroom.
extant	still in existence	Although the authorities suppressed the book, many copies are extant and may be purchased at exorbitant prices.
extemporaneous	not planned; impromtu	Because his extemporaneous remarks were misinterpreted, he decided to write all his speeches in advance.
extenuate	weaken; mitigate	It is easier for us to extenuate our own shortcomings than those of others.
extirpate	root up	The Salem witch trials were a misguided attempt to extirpate superstition and heresy.
extol	praise; glorify	The astronauts were extolled as the pioneers of the Space Age.
extort	wring from; get money by threats, etc	The blackmailer extorted money from his victim.
extradition	surrender of prisoner by one state to another	The lawyers opposed the extradition of their client on the grounds that for more than five years he had been a model citizen.
extraneous	not essential; external	Do not pad your paper with extraneous matters; stick to essential items only.
extrapolation	projection; conjecture	Based on their extrapolation from the results of the primaries on Super Tuesday, the networks predicted that George Bush would be the Republican candidate for the presidency.
extricate	free; disentangle	He found that he could not extricate himself from the trap.
extrinsic	external; not inherent; foreign	Do not be fooled by extrinsic causes. We must look for the intrinsic reason.
extrovert	person interested mostly in external objects and actions	A good salesperson in usually an extrovert, who likes to mingle with people.
extrude	force or push out	Much pressure is required to extrude these plastics.
exuberant	abundant; effusive; lavish	His speeches were famous for his exuberant language and vivid imagery.
exude	discharge; give forth	The maple syrup is obtained from the sap that the trees exude in early spring.
exult	rejoice	We exulted when our team won the victory.
fabricate	build; lie	Because of the child's tendency to fabricate, we had trouble believing her.
facade	front of the building	The facade of the church had often been photographed by tourists because it was more interesting than the rear.
facet	small plane surface (of a gem); a side	The stonecutter decided to improve the rough diamond by providing it with several facets.
facetious	humorous; jocular	Your facetious remarks are not appropriate at this serious moment.
facile	easy; expert	Because he was a facile speaker, he never refused a request to address an organization.
facilitate	make less difficult	He tried to facilitate repayment of the loan by getting a part-time job.
facsimilie	copy	Many museums sell facsimilies of the works of art on display.
faction	party; clique; dissension	The quarrels and bickering of the two small factions within the club disturbed the majority of the members.
factious	inclined to form factions; causing dissension	Your statement is factious and will upset the harmony that now exists.
factitous	artificial; sham	Hollywood actresses often create factitious tears by using glycerine.
factotum	handyman; person who does all kinds of work	Although we had hired him as a messenger, we soon began to use him as a general factotum around the office.
faculty	mental or bodily powers; teaching staff	As he grew old, he feared he might lose his faculties and become useless to his employer.
fallacious	misleading	Your reasoning must be fallacious because it leads to a ridiculous answer.
fallible	liable to err	I know I am fallible, but I feel confident that I am right this time.
fallow	plowed but sowed; uncultivated	Farmers have learned that it is advisable to permit land to le fallow every few years.
falter	hesitate	When told to dive off the high board, she did not falter, but proceeded at once.
fanaticism	excessive zeal	The leader of the group was held responsible even though he could not control the fanaticism of his followers.
fancied	imagined; unreal	You are resenting fancied insults. No one has ever said such things about you.
fancier	breeder or dealer of animals	The dog fancier exhibited her prize collie at the annual Kennel Club show.
fanciful	whimsical; visionary	This is a fanciful scheme because it does not consider the facts.
fanfare	call by bugles or trumpets; showy display	The exposition was opened with fanfare of trumpets and the firing of cannon.
fantastic	unreal; grotesque; whimsical	Your fears are fantastic because no such animal as you have described exists.
farce	broad comedy; mockery	Nothing went right; the entire interview degenerated into a farce.
fastidious	difficult to please; squeamish	The waitresses disliked serving him dinner because of his very fastidious taste.
fatalism	belief that events are determined by forces beyond one's control	With fatalism, he accepted the hardships that beset him.
fathom	comprehend; investigate	I find his motives impossible to fathom.
fatuous	foolish; inane	He is far too intelligent to utter such fatuous remarks.
fauna	animals of a period or region	The scientist could visualize the fauna of the period by examining the skeletal remains and the fossils.
fawning	courting favor by cringing and flattering	She was constantly surrounded by a group of fawning admirers who had hoped to win some favor.
faze	disconcert; dismay	No crisis could faze the resourceful hotel manager.
feasible	practical	This is an entirely feasible proposal. I suggest we adopt it.
febrile	feverish	In his febrile condition, he was subject to nightmares and hallucinations.
feckless	feeble, ineffective; unthinking, irresponsible	Einstein was noted for his extraordinary inspirations; on the other hand, he was noted for being feckless in his daily chores.
fecundity	fertility; fruitfulness	The fecundity of his mind is illustrated by the many vivid images in his poems.
feign	pretend	Lady Macbeth feigned illness in the courtyard although she was actually healthy.
feint	trick; shift; sham blow	The boxer was fooled by his opponent's feint and dropped his guard.
felicitous	apt; suitably expressed; well chosen	He was famous for his felicitous remarks and was called upon to serve as master-of-ceremonies at many banquet.
felicity	happines; appropriateness (of a remark, choice, etc.)	She wrote a note to the newlyweds wishing them great felicity in their wedded life.
fell	cruel; deadly	The newspapers told of the tragic spread of the fell disease
felon	person convicted of a grave crime	A convicted felon loses the right to vote
ferment	agitation; commotion	With the breakup of the Soviet Union, much of Eastern Europe was in a state of ferment.
ferret	drive or hunt out of hiding	She was ferreted out their secret.
fervent	ardent; hot	She felt that the fervent praise was excessive and somewhat undeserved.
fervid	ardent	Her fervid enthusiasm inspired all of us to undertake the dangerous mission.
fervor	glowing ardor	Their kiss was full of the fervor of first love.
fester	generate pus	When her finger began to fester, the doctor lanced it and removed the splinter that had caused the pus to form.
fester	rankle, produce irritation or resentment	Joe's insult festered in Anne's mind for days, and made her too angry to speak to him.
festive	joyous; celebratory	Their wedding in the park was a festive occasion.
fete	honor at a festival	The returning hero was feted at a community supper and dance.
fetid	malodorous	The neglected wound became fetid.
fetter	shackle	The prisoner was fettered to the wall.
fiasco	total failure	Our ambitious venture ended in a fiasco and we were forced to flee.
fiat	command	I cannot accept government by fiat; I feel that I must be consulted.
fickle	changeable; faithless	He discovered his supposedly faithful girlfriend was fickle
fictitious	imaginary	Although this book purports to be a biography of George Washington, many of the incidents are fictitious.
fidelity	loyalty	A dog's fidelity to its owner is one of the reasons why that animal is a favorite household pet.
figment	invention; imaginary thing	That incident never took place; it is a figment of your imagination.
figurative	not literal, but metaphorical; using a figure of speech	"To lose one's marbles" is a figurative expression; if you're told Jack has lost his marbles, no one expects you to rush out to buy him a replacement set.
figurine	small ornamental statuette	In the Maltese Falcon, Sam Spade was hired to trace the missing figurine of a black bird.
filch	steal	The boys filched apples from the fruit stand.
filial	pertaining to a son or daughter	Many children forget their filial obligations and disregard the wishes of their parents.
filibuster	block legislation by making long speeches	Even though we disapproved of Senator Foghorn's political goals, we were impressed by his ability to filibuster endlessly to keep an issue from coming to a vote.
filigree	delicate, lacelike metalwork	The pendant with gold filigree that she wore round her neck trembled with each breath she took.
finale	conclusion	It is not until we reach the finale of this play that we can understand the author's message.
finesse	delicate skill	The finesse and adroitness of the surgeon impressed the observers in the operating room.
finicky	too particular; fussy	The old lady was finicky about her food and ate very little.
finite	limited	It is difficult for humanity with its finite existence to grasp the infinite.
firebrand	hothead; troublemaker	The police triedto keep track of all the local firebrands when the President came to town.
fissure	crevice	The mountain climbers secured footholds in tiny fissures in the rock.
fitful	spasmodic; intermittent	After several fitful attempts, he decided to postpone the start of the project until he felt more energetic.
flaccid	flabby	His sedentary life had left him with flaccid muscles.
flag	droop; grow feeble	When the opposing hockey team scored its third goal only minutes into the first period, the home team's spirits flagged.
flagrant	conspicuously wicked	We cannot condone such flagrant violations of the rules.
flail	thresh grain by hand; strike or slap; toss about	In medieval times, warriors flailed their foe with a metal ball attached to a handle.
flair	talent	She has an uncanny flair for discovering new artists before the public has become aware of their existence.
flamboyant	ornate	Modern architecture has discarded the flamboyant trimming on buildings and emphasizes simplicity of line.
flaunt	display ostentatiously	She is not the one of those actresses who flaunt their physical charms; she can act.
flay	strip off skin; plunder	The criminal was condemned to be flayed alive.
fleck	spot	Her cheeks flecked with tears, were testimony to the hours of weeping.
fledgling	inexperienced	While it is necessary to provide these fledgling poets with an opportunity to present their work, it is not essential that we admire everything they write.
fleece	rob; plunder	The tricksters fleeced him of his inheritance.
fleece	wool coat of a sheep	They shear sheep of their fleece, which they then comb into separate strands of wool.
flick	light stroke as with a whip	The horse needed no encouragement; only one flick of the whip was all the jockey had to apply to get the animal to run at top speed.
flinch	hesitate; shrink	He did not flinch in the face of danger but fought back bravely.
flippancy	trifling gaiety	Your flippancy at this serious moment is offensive.
flit	fly; dart lightly; pass swiftly by	Like a bee flitting from flower to flower, Rose flitted from one boyfriend to the next.
floe	mass of floating ice	The ship made slow progress as it battered its way through the ice floes.
flora	plants of a region or era	Because she was a botanist, she spent most of her time studying the flora of the desert.
florid	flowery; ruddy	His complexion was even more florid than usual because of his anger.
flotsam	drifting wreckage	Beachcombers eke out a living by salvaging the flotsam and jetsam of the sea.
flourish	grow well; prosper; make sweeping gestures	The orange trees flourished in the sun.
flout	reject; mock	The headstrong youth flouted all authority; he refused to be curbed.
fluctuation	wavering	Meteorologists watch the fluctuations of the barometer in order to predict the weather.
fluency	smoothness of speech	He spoke French with fluency and ease.
fluke	unlikely occurrence; stroke of fortune When Douglass defeated Tyson for the heavyweight championship, some sportscasters dismissed his	victory as a fluke.
fluster	confuse	The teacher's sudden question flustered him and he stammered his reply.
fluted	having vertical parallel grooves (as in a pillar)	All that remained of the ancient building were the fluted columns.
flux	flowing; series of changes	While conditions are in such a state of flux, I do not wish to commit myself too deeply in this affair.
fodder	coarse food for cattle, horses etc	One of Nancy's chores ar the ranch was to put fresh supplies of fodder in the horses' stalls.
foible	weakness; slight fault	We can overlook the foibles of our friends; no one is perfect.
foil	contrast	In "Star Wars," dark, evil Darth Vader is a perfect foil for fair-haired, naive Luke Skywalker.
foil	defeat; frustrate	In the end, Skywalker is able to foil Vader's diabolical schemes.
foist	insert improperly; palm off	I will not permit you to foist such ridiculous ideas upon the membership of this group.
foliage	masses of leaves	Every autumn before the leaves fell he promised himself he would drive though the New England to admire the colorful fall foliage.
foment	stir up; instigate	This report will foment disssension in the club.
foolhardy	rash	Don't be foolhardy. Get the advice of experienced people before undertaking this venture.
foppish	vain about dress and appearance	He tried to imitate the foppish manner of the young men of the court.
foray	raid	The company staged a midnight foray against the enemy outpost.
forberance	patience	We must use forbearance in dealing with him because he is still weak from his illness.
ford	place where a river can be crossed on foot	Rather than risk using the shaky rope bridge, David walked a half-mile downstream until he came to the neartest ford.
forebears	ancestors	Reverence for one's forebears (sometimes referred to as ancestor worship) plays an important part in many Oriental cultures.
foreboding	premonition of evil	Caeser ridiculed his wife's foreboding about the Ides of March.
forensic	suitable to debate or courts of law	In her best forensic manner, the lawyer addressed the jury.
foreshadow	give an indication beforehand; portend; prefigure	In retrospect, political analysts realized that Yeltsin's defiance of the attempted coup foreshadowed his emergence as the dominant figure of the new Russian republic.
foresight	ability to foresee future happenings; prudence	A wise investor, she had the foresight to buy land just before the current real estate boom.
forestall	prevent by taking action in advance	By setting up a prenuptial agreement, the prospective bride and groom hoped to forestall any potential arguments about money in the event of a divorce.
forgo	give up; do without	Determined to lose weight for the summer, Ida decided to forgo dessert until she could fit into a size eight again.
formality	adherence to established rules or procedures	Signing this petition is a mere formality; it does not obligate you in any way.
formidable	menacing; threatening	We must not treat the battle lightly for we are facing a formidable foe.
forsake	desert; abandon; renounce	No one expected Foster to forsake his wife and children and run off with another woman.
forswear	renounce; abandon	The captured knight could escape death only if he agreed to forswear Christianity and embrace Islam as the one true faith.
forte	strong point or special talent	I am not eager to play this rather seious role, for my forte is comedy.
forthright	straightforward; direct; frank	I prefer Jill's forthright approach to Jack's tendency to beat around the bush.
fortitude	bravery; courage	He was awarded the medal for his fortitude in the battle.
fortuitous	accidental; by chance	There is no connection between these two events; their timing is entirely fortuitous.
foster	rear; encourage	According to the legend, Romulus and Remus were fostered by a she-wolf that raised the abandoned infants as her own.
founder	fail completely; sink	After hitting the submerged iceberg, the Titanic started taking in water rapidly and soon foundered.
founder	person who establishes (an organization, business)	Among those drowned when the Titanic sank was the founder of the Abraham & Straus chain.
fracas	brawl; melee	The military police stopped the fracas in the bar and arrested the belligerents.
fractious	unruly	The fractious horse unseated its rider.
frailty	weakness	The doctor prescribed vitamin and mineral supplements for the sick old woman because of her frailty.
franchise	right granted by authority	The city issued a franchise to the company to operate surface transit lines on the streets for ninety-nine years.
frantic	wild	At the time of the collision, many people became frantic with fear.
fraudulent	cheating; deceitful	The government seeks to prevent fraudulent and misleading advertising.
fraught	filled	Since this enterprise is fraught with danger, I will ask for volunteers who are willing to assume the risks.
fray	brawl	The three musketeers were in the thick of fray.
frenetic	frenzied; frantic	His frenetic activities convinced us that he had no organized plan of operation.
frenzied	madly excited	As soon as they smelled smoke, the frenzied animals milled about in their cages.
fresco	painting in plaste (usually fresh)	The cathedral is visited by many tourists who wish to admire the frescoes by Glotto.
fret	to be annonyed or vexed	To fret over your poor grades is foolish; instead, decide to work harder in the future.
friction	clash in opinion; rubbing against	At this time when harmony is essential, we cannot afford to have any friction in our group.
frieze	ornamental band on a wall	The frieze of the church was adorned with sculpture.
frigid	intensely cold	Alaska is in the frigid zone.
fritter	waste	He could not apply himself to any task and frittered away his time in idle conversation.
frivolous	lacking in seriousness; self-indulgently carefree; relatively unimportant	Though Nancy enjoyed Bill's frivolous, lighthearted companionship, she sometimes wondered whether he could ever be serious.
frolicsome	prankish; gay	The frolicsome puppy tried to lick the face of its master.
frond	fern leaf; palm or banana leaf	After the storm the beach was littered with the fronds of palm trees.
fructify	bear fruit	This peach tree should fructify in three years.
frugality	thrift; economy	In these economically difficult days businesses must practice frugality or risk bankruptcy.
fruition	bearing of fruit; fulfillment; realization	This building marks the fruition of all our aspirations and years of hard work.
fugitive	fleeting or transitory; roving	The film brought a few fugitive images to her mind, but on the whole it made no lasting impression upon her.
fulcrum	support on which a lever rests	If we use this stone as a fulcrum and the crowbar as a lever, we may be able to move this boulder.
fulminate	thunder; explode	The people against whom she fulminated were innocent of any wrongdoing.
fulsome	disgustingly excessive	His fulsome praise of the dictator annoyed his listeners.
functionary	official	As his case was transferred from one functionary to another, he began to despair of ever reaching a settlement.
fundamental	basic; primary; essential The committee discussed all sorts of side issues without ever getting down to addressing the fundamental	problem.
funereal	sad; solemn	I fail to understand why there is such a funereal atmosphere; we have lost a battle, not a war.
furor	frenzy; great excitement	The story of her embezzlement of the funds created a furor on the stock exchange.
furtive	stealthy; sneaky	The boy gave a furtive look at his classmate's test paper.
fusilade	simultaneous firing or outburs (of missiles, questions, etc.)	Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture concludes with a thunderous fusilade of cannon fire.
fusion	union; coalition	The opponents of the political party in power organized a fusion of disgruntled groups and became an important element in the election.
futile	ineffective; fruitless	Why waste your time on futile pursuits?
gadfly	animal-biting fly; an irritating person	Like a gadfly, he irritated all the guests at the hotel; within forty eight hours, everyone regarded him as an annoying busybody.
gaffe	social blunder	According to Miss Manners, to call your husband by your lover's name is worse than a mere gaffe; it is a tactical mistake.
gainsay	deny	She was too honest to gainsay the truth of the report.
gait	manner of walking or running; speed	The lame man walked with an uneven gait.
galaxy	the Milky Way; any collection of brilliant personalities	The deaths of such famous actors as Clark Gable, Gary Cooper, Spencer Tracy, and Marlene Dietrich demonstrate that the galaxy of Hollywood superstars is rapidly disppearing.
gall	annoy; chafe	Their taunts galled him.
gall	bitterness; nerve	The knowledge of his failure filled him with gall.
galleon	large sailing ship	The Spaniards pinned their hopes on the galleon, the large warship; the British, on the smaller and faster pinnace.
galvanize	stimulate by shock; stir up	The entire nation was galvanized into strong military activity by the news of the attack on Pearl Harbor.
gambit	opening in chess in which a piece is sacrificed	The player was afraid to accept his opponent's gambit because he feared a trap which as yet he could not see.
gambol	skip; leap playfully	Watching children gamboling in the park is a pleasant experience
gamely	in a spirited manner; with courage	Because he had fought gamely against a much superior boxer, the crowd gave him a standing ovation when he left the arena.
gamut	entire range	In this performance, the leading lady was able to demonstrate the complete gamut of her acting ability.
gape	open widely	The huge pit gaped before him; if he stumbled, he would fall in.
garbled	mixed up; jumbled; distorted	A favorite party game involves passing a whispered message from one person to another; by the time it reaches the last player, the message has become totally garbled.
gargantuan	huge; enormous	The gargantuan wrestler was terrified of mice.
gargolye	waterspout carved in groteque figures on a building	The gargoyles adorning the Cathedral of Notre Dame in Paris are amusing in their grotesqueness.
garish	gaudy	She wore a garish rhinestone necklace.
garner	gather; store up	She hoped to garner the world's literature in one library.
garnish	decorate	Parsley was used to garnish the boiled potato.
garrulity	talkativeness	The man who married a dumb wife asked the doctor to make him deaf because of his wife's garrulity after her cure.
garrulous	excessively talkative, especially about unimportant subjects; loquacious; wordy	Many club members avoided the company of the garrulous junior executive because his contant chatter bored them to tears.
gastronomy	science of preparing and serving good food	One of the by-products of his trip to Europe was his interest in gastronomy; he enjoyed preparing and serving foreign dishes to his friends.
gauche	clumsy; boorish	Such remarks are gauche and out of place; you should apologize for making them.
gaudy	flashy; showy	Her gaudy taste in clothes apalled us.
gaunt	lean and angular; barren	His once-round face looked surprisingly gaunt after he had lost weight.
gawk	stare foolishly; look in open-mouthed awe	The country boy gawked at the skyscrapers and neon lights of the big city.
gazette	official publication	He read the gazettes regularly for announcement of his promotion.
genealogy	record of descent; lineage	He was proud of his genealogy and constantly referred to the achievements of his ancestors.
generality	vague statement	This report is filled with generalities; you must be more specific in you statements.
generic	characteristic of an entire class or species	Sue knew so many computer programmers who spent their spare time playing fantasy games that she began to think that playing Dungeon & Dragons was a generic trait.
genesis	beginning; origin	Tracing the genesis of a family is the theme of "Roots".
geniality	cheerfulness; kindliness; sympathy	This restaurant is famous and popular because of the geniality of the proprietor, who tries to make everyone happy.
genre	particular variety of art or literature	Both a short story writer and a poet, Langston Hughes proved himself equally skilled in either genre.
genteel	well-bred; elegant	We are looking for a man with a genteel apperance who can inspire confidence by his cultivated manner.
gentility	those of gentle birth; refinement	Her family was proud of its gentility and elegance.
gentry	people of standing; class of people just below nobility	The local gentry did not welcome the visits of the summer tourists and tried to ignore their presence in the community.
genuflect	bend the knee as in worship	A proud denocrat, he refused to genuflect to any man.
germane	pertinent; bearing upon the case at hand	The lawyer objected that the testimony being offered was not germane to the case at hand.
germinal	pertaining to a germ; creative	Such an idea is germinal; I am certain that it will influence thinkers and philosophers for many generations.
germinate	cause to sprout; sprout	After the seeds germinate and develop their permanent leaves, the plants may be removed from the cold frames and transplanted to the garden.
gerontocracy	government ruled by old people	Gulliver visited a gerontocracy in which the young people acted as servants to their elders, all the while dreaming of the day they would be old enough to have servants of their own.
gerrymander	change in voting district lines in order to favor a political party	The illogical pattern of the map of this congressional district is proof that the state legislature gerrymandered this area in order to favor the majority party.
gestate	evolve, as in prenatal growth	While this scheme was being gestated by the conspirators, they maintained complete silence about their intentions.
gesticulation	motion; gesture	Operatic performers are trained to make exaggerated gesticulations because of the large auditoriums in whic they appear.
ghastly	horrible	The murdered man was a ghastly sight.
gibberish	nonsense; babbling	Did you hear that foolish boy spouting gibberish about monsters from outer space?
gibe	mock	As you gibe at their superstitious beliefs, do you realize that you, too, are guilty of similarly foolish thoughts?
giddy	light-hearted; dizzy	He felt his giddy youth was past.
gingerly	very carefully	To separate egg whites, first crack the egg gingerly.
girth	distance around something; circunference	It took an extra-large cummerbund to fit around Andrew Carnegie's considerable girth.
gist	essence	she was asked to give the gist of the essay in two sentence.
glacial	like a glacier; extremely cold	Never a warm person, when offended hugo could seem positively glacial.
glaring	highly conspicuous; harshly bright	glaring spelling or grammatical errors in your resume will unfavorably impress potential employers.
glaze	cover with a thin and shiny surface	The freezing rain glazed the streets and made driving hazardous.
glean	gather leavings	After the crops had been harvested by the machines, the peasants were permitted to glean the wheat left in the fields.
glib	fluent	He is a glib and articulate speaker.
glimmer	shine erratically; twinkle	In the darkness of the cavern, the glowworms hanging from the cavern roof glimmered like distant stars.
gloat	express evil satisfaction; view malevolently	As you gloat over your ill-gotten wealth, do you think of the many victims you have defrauded?
gloss	over explain away	No matter how hard he tried to talk around the issue, President Bush could not gloss over the fact that he had raised the taxes after all.
glossary	brief explanation of words used in the text	I have found the glossary in this book very useful; it has eliminated many trips to the dictionary.
glossy	smooth and shining	I want this photograph printed on glossy paper, not matte.
glower	scowl	The angry boy glowered at his father.
glut	overstock; fill to excess	The many manufacturers glutted the market and could not find purchasers for the many articles they had produced.
glutinous	sticky; viscous	Molasses is a glutinous substance.
glutton	someone who eats too much	When Mother saw that Bobby had eaten all the cookies, she called him a little glutton.
gnarled	twisted	The gnarled oak tree had been a landmark for years and was mentioned in several deeds.
gnome	dwarf; underground spirit	In medieval mythology, gnomes were the special guardians and inhabitants of subterranean mines.
goad	urge on	He was goaded by his friends until he yielded to their wishes.
gorge	narrow canyon; steep, rocky cleft	Terrified of heights, George could not bring himself to peer down into the gorge to see the rapids below.
gorge	stuff oneself	The gluttonous guest gorged himself with food as though he had not eaten for days.
gory	bloody	The audience shuddered as they listened to the details of the gory massacre.
gossamer	sheer; like cobwebs	Nylon can be woven into gossaner or thick fabrics.
gouge	tear out	In that fight, all the rules were forgotten; the adversaries bit, kicked, and tried to gouge each other's eyes out.
gourmand	epicure; person who takes excessive pleasure in food and drink	goumands lack self-restraint; if they enjoy a particular cuisine, they eat far too much of it.
gourmet	connoisseur of food and drink	The gourmet stated that this was the best onion soup she had ever tasted.
graduated	arraged by degree (of height, difficulty, etc.)	Margaret loved her graduated set of Russian hollow wooden dolls; she spent hours happily putting the smaller dolls into their larger counterparts.
granary	storehouse for grain	We have reason to be thankful, for our crops were good and our granaries are full.
grandeur	impressiveness; stateliness; majesty	No matter how often he hiked through the mountains, David never failed to be struck by the grandeur of the Sierra Nevada range.
grandiloquent	pompous; bombastic; using high-sounding language	The politician could bever speak simply; she was always grandiloquent.
grandiose	imposing; impressive	His grandiose manner impressed those who met him for the first time.
granulate	form into grains	Sugar that has been granulated dissolves more readily than lump sugar.
graphic	pertaining to the art of delineating; vividly described	I was particularly impressed by the graphic presentation of the storm.
grapple	wrestle; come to grips with	He grappled with the burglar and overpowered him.
grate	make a harsh noise; have an unpleasant effect; shred	The screams of the quarreling children grated on her nerves.
gratify	please	Her parents were gratified by her success.
gratis	free	The company offered to give one package gratis to every purchaser of one of their products.
gratuitous	given freely; unwarranted; uncalled for	Quit making gratuitous comments about my driving; no one asked you for your opinion.
gratuity	tip	Many service employees rely more on gratuities than on salaries for their livelihood.
gravity	seriousness	We could tell we were in serious trouble from the gravity of her expression.
gregarious	sociable	Typically, party-throwers are gregarious; hermits are not.
grievance	cause of complaint	When her supervisor ignored her complaint, she took her grievance to the union.
grill	question severely	In violation of the Miranda law, the police grilled the suspect for several hours before reading him his rights.
grimace	a facial distortion to show feeling such as pain, disgust, etc	Even though he remained silent, his grimace indicated his displeasure.
grisly	ghastly	She shuddered at the grisly sight.
grotesque	fantastic; comically hideous	On Halloween people enjoy wearing groteque costumes.
grotto	small cavern	The Blue Grotto in Capri can be entered only by small boats rowed by natives through a natural opening in the rocks.
grouse	complain; fuss	Students traditionally grouse about the abysmal quality of "mystery meat" and similar dornitory food.
grovel	crawl or creep on ground; remain prostrate	Even though we have been defeated, we do not have to grovel before our conquerors.
grudging	unwilling; reluctant; stingy	We received only grudging support from the mayor despite his earlier promises of aid.
gruel	thin, liquid porridge	Our daily allotment of gruel made the meal not only monotonous but also unpalatable.
grueling	exhausting	The marathon is a grueling race.
gruesome	grisly	People screamed when her gruesome appearance was flashed on the screen.
gruff	rough-mannered	Although he was blunt and gruff with most people, he was always gentle with children.
guffaw	boisterous laughter	The loud guffaws that came from the closed room indicated that the members of the committe had not yet settled down to a serious business.
guile	deceit; duplicity	She achieved her high position by guile and treachery.
guileless	without deceit	He is naive, simple, and guileless; he cannot be guilty of fraud.
guise	appearance; costume	In the guise of a plumber, the detective investigated the murder case.
gullible	easily deceived	He preyed upon gullible people, who believed his stories of easy wealth.
gustatory	affecting the sense of taste	The Thai restaurant offered an unusual gustatory experience for those used in a bland cuisine.
gusto	enjoyment; enthusiasm	He accepted the assignment with such gusto that I feel he would have been satisfied with a smaller salary.
gusty	windy	The gusty weather made sailing precarious.
gyroscope	apparatus used to maintain balance, ascertain direction, etc	By using a rotating gyroscope, they were able to stabilize the vessel, counteracting the rolling movements of the sea.  114. - apparatus used to maintain balance, ascertain direction, etc.
hackles	hairs on back and neck, especially of a dog	The dog's hackles rose and he began to growl as the sound of footsteps grew louder.
hackneyed	commonplace; trite	The English teacher criticized her story because of its hackneyed and unoriginal plot.
haggard	wasted away; gaunt	After his long illness, he was pale and haggard.
haggle	argue about prices	I prefer to shop in a store that has a one-price policy because, whenever I haggle with a shopkeeper, I am never certain that I paid a fair price for the articles I purchased.
halcyon	calm; peaceful	In those halcyon days, people were not worried about sneak attacks and bombings.
hale	healthy	After a brief illness, he was soon hale.
hallowed	blessed; consecrated	She was laid to rest in hallowed ground.
hallucination	delusion	I think you were frightened by a hallucination that you created in you own mind.
halting	hesitant; faltering	Novice extemporaneous speakers often talk in a halting fashion as they grope for the right words.
hamper	obstruct	The minority party agreed not to hamper the efforts of the leaders to secure a lasting peace.
hap	chance; luck	In his poem hap, Thomas Hardy objects to the part chance plays in our lives.
haphazard	random; by chance	His haphazard reading left him unaquainted with the authors of the books.
hapless	unfortunate	This hapless creature had never known a moment's pleasure.
harangue	long, passionate, and vehement speech	In her lengthy harangue, the principal berated the offenders.
harass	annoy by repeated attacks	When he could not pay his bills as quickly as he had promised, he was harrassed by his creditors.
harbinger	forerunner	The crocus is an early harbinger of spring.
harbor	provide a refuge for; hide	The church harbored illegal aliens who were political refugees.
hardy	sturdy; robust; able to stand inclement weather	We asked the gardening expert to recommend particularly hardy plants that could withstand our harsh New England winters.
harping	tiresome dwelling on a subject	After he had reminded me several times about what he had done for me I told him to stop his harping on my indebtedness to him.
harrow	break up ground after plowing; torture	I don't want to harrow you at this time by asking you to recall the details of your unpleasant experience.
harry	harass, annoy, torment; raid	The guerrilla band harried the enemy nightly.
hatch	deck opening; lid covering a deck opening	The latch on the hatch failed to catch, so the hatch remained unlatched.
haughtiness	pride; arrogance	I resent his haughtiness because he is no better than we are.
hazardous	dangerous	Your occupation is too hazardous for insurance companies to consider your application.
hazy	slightly obscure	In hazy weather, you cannot see the top of this mountain.
headlong	hasty; rash	The slave seized the unexpected chance to make a headlong dash across the border to freedom.
headstrong	stubborn; willful; unyielding	Because she refused to marry the man her parents had chosen for her, everyone scolded Minna and called her a foolish, headstrong girl.
heckler	person who verbally harasses others	The heckler kept interrupting the speaker with rude remarks.
hedonism	belief that pleasure is the sole aim in life	hedonism and asceticism are opposing philosophies of human behavior.
heedless	not noticing; disregarding	He drove on, heedless of the warnings that the road was dangerous.
hegemony	dominance, especially of one nation over others	As one Eastern European nation after another declared its independence, commentators marveled at the sudden breakdown of the once monolithic Soviet hegemony.
heinous	atrocious; hatefully bad	Hitler's heinous crimes will never be forgotten.
herbivorous	grain-eating	Some herbivorous animals have two stomachs for digesting their food.
heresy	opinion contrary to popular belief or to accepted religion	He was threatened with excommunication because his remarks were considered to be pure heresy.
heretic	person who maintains opinions contrary to the doctrines of the church	She was punished by the Spanish Inquisition because she was a heretic.
hermetic	obscure and mysterious; occult	It is strange to consider that modern chemistry originated in the hermetic teachings of the ancient alchemists.
hermetic	sealed by fusion so as to be airtight	After these bandages are sterilized, they are placed in hermetic containers.
hermitage	home of a hermit	Even in his remote hermitage he could not escape completely from the world.
herpetologist	one who studies reptiles	As a boy, Indiana Jones had a traumatic experience involving snakes; sensibly enough, he studies to be archaeologist, not a herpetologist.
heterodox	unorthodox; unconventional	To those who upheld the belief that the earth did not move, Galileo's theory that the earth circled the sun was disturbingly heterodox.
heterogeneous	dissimilar	In a heterogeneous group, we have an unassorted assemblage, while in a homogeneous group we have people or things that have common traits.
hew	cut to pieces with ax or sword	The cavalry rushed into melee and hewed the enemy with their swords.
heyday	time of greatest success; prime	In their heyday, the San Francisco Forty-Niners won the Super Bowl two years running.
hiatus	gap; pause	Except for a brief two-year hiatus, during which she enrolled in the Peace Corps, Ms. Clements has devoted herself to her medical career.
hibernal	wintry	Bears prepare for their long hibernal sleep by overeating.
hibernate	sleep throughout the winter	Bears are one of the many species of animals that hibernate.
hierarchy	body divided into ranks	It was difficult to step out of one's place in this hierarchy.
hieroglyphic	picture writing	The discovery of the Rosetta Stone enabled scholars to read the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics.
hilarity	boisterous mirth	The hilarity is improper on this solemn day of mourning.
hindmost	furthest behind	The coward could always be found in the hindmost lines whenever a battle was being waged.
hindrance	block; obstacle	Stalled cars along the highway are a hindrance to traffic that tow trucks should remove without delay.
hinterlands	back country	They seldom had visitors, living as they did way out in the hinderlands.
hireling	one who serves for hire (usually used contemptuously)	In a matter of such importance, I do not wish to deal with hirelings; I must meet with the chief.
hirsute	hairy	He was a hitsute individual with a heavy black beard.
histrionic	theatrical	He was proud of his histrionic ability and wanted to paly the role of Hamlet.
hoard	stockpile; accumulate for future use	Whenever there are rumors of a food shortage, people are tempted to hoard food.
hoary	white with age	The man was hoary and wrinkled when he was 70.
hoax	trick; practical joke	Embarrassed by the hoax, he reddened and left the room.
holocaust	destruction by fire	Citizens of San Francisco remember that the destruction of the city was caused not by the earthquake but by the holocaust that followed.
holster	pistol case	Even when he was not in uniform, he carried a holster and pistol under his arm.
homage	honor; tribute	In her speech she tried to pay homage to a great man.
homeostasis	tendency of a system to maintain relative stability	A breakdown of the body's immune system severely undermines the body's ability to maintain homeostasis.
homespun	domestic; made at home	homespun wit, like homespun cloth, was often coarse and plain.
homily	sermon; serious warning	His speeches were always homilies, advising his listeners to repent and reform.
homogeneous	of the same kind	Many educators try to put pupils of similar abilities in the same class because they believe that his homogeneous grouping is advisable.
hone	sharpen	To make shaving easier, he honed his razor with great care.
hoodwink	deceive; delude	Having been hoodwinked once by the fast-talking salesman, he was extremely cautious when he went to purchase a used car.
horde	crowd	Just before Christmas the stores are filled with hordes of shoppers.
hortatory	encouraging; exhortive	The crowd listened to his hortatory statements with ever-growing excitement; finally they rushed from the hall to carry to his suggestions.
horticultural	pertaining to cultivation of gardens	When he bought his house, he beganto look for flowers and decorative shrubs, and began to read books dealing with horticultural matters.
hovel	shack; small, wretched house	He wondered how poor people could stand living in such a hovel.
hover	hang about; wait nearby	The police helicopter hovered above the accident.
hubbub	confused uproar	The marketplace was a scene of hubbub and excitement.
hubris	arrogance; excessive self-conceit	Filled with hubris, Lear refused to heed his friends' warnings.
hue	color; aspect	The aviary contained birds of every possible hue.
hue	outcry	When her purse was snatched, she raised such a hue and cry that the thief was captured.
humane	kind	His humane and considerate treatment of the unfortunate endeared him to all.
humdrum	dull; monotonous	After years of adventure, he could not settle down to a humdrum existence.
humid	damp	She could not stand the humid climate and moved to a drier area.
humility	humbleness of spirit	He spoke with a humility and lack of pride that impressed his listeners.
hummock	small hill	The ascent of the hummock is not difficult and the view from the hilltop is ample reward tor the effort.
humus	substance formed by decaying vegetable matter	In order to improve his garden, he spread humus over his lawn and flower beds.
hurtle	crash; rush	The runaway train hurtled toward disaster.
husbandry	frugality; thrift; agriculture	He accumulated his small fortune by diligence and husbandry.
hybrid	mongrel; mixed breed	Mendel's formula explains the appearance of hybrids and pure species in breeding.
hydrophobia	fear of water; rabies	A dog that bites a human being must be observed for symptoms of hydrophobia.
hyperbole	exaggeration; overstatement	This salesman is guilty of hyperbole in describing his product; it is wise to discount his claims.
hypercritical	excessively exacting	You are hypercritical in your demands for perfection; we all make mistakes.
hypochondriac	person unduly worried about his health; worrier without cause about illness	The doctor prescribed chocolate pills for his patient who was a hypocondriac.
hypocritical	pretending to be virtuous; deceiving	I resent his hypocritical posing as a friend for I know he is interested only in his own advancement.
hypothetical	based on assumptions or hypotheses	Why do we have to consider hypothetical cases when we have actual case histories that we may examine?
ichthyology	study of fish	Jacques Cousteau's rpograms about sea life have advanced the cause of ichthyology.
icon	religious image; idol	The icons on the walls of the church were painted in the 13th century.
iconoclastic	attacking cherished traditions	George Bernard Shaw's iconoclastic plays often startled more conventional people.
ideology	ideas of a group of people	That ideology is dangerous to this country because it embraces undemocratic philosophies.
idiom	spcial usage in language	I could not understand their idioms because literal translation made no sense.
idiosyncrasy	peculiarity; eccentricity	One of his personal idiosyncrasies was his habit of rinsing all cutlery given him in a restaurant.
idiosyncratic	private; peculiar to an individual	Such behavior is idiosyncratic, it is as easily identifiable as a signature.
idolatry	worship of idols; excessive admiration	Such idolatry of singers of country music is typical of the excessive enthusiasm of youth.
idyllic	charmingly carefree; simple	Far from the city, she led an idyllic existence in her rural retreat.
igneous	produced by fire; volcanic	Lava, pumice, and other igneous rocks are found in great abundance around Mount Vesuvius near Naples.
ignite	kindle; light	When Desi crooned, "Baby, light my fire," literal-minded Lucy looked around for some paper to ignite.
ignoble	of lowly origin; unworthy	This plan is inspired by ignoble motives and I must, therefore, oppose it.
ignominious	disgraceful	The country smarted under the ignominious defeat and dreamed of the day when it would be victorious.
illicit	illegal	The defense attorney claimed that the police had entrapped his client; that is, they had elicited the illicit action of which they now accuse of him.
illimitable	infinite	Human beings, having explored the far corners of the earth, are now reaching out into illimitable space.
illuminate	brighten; clear up or make understandable; enlighten	Just as a lamp can illuminate a dark room, a perceptive comment can illuminate a knotty problem.
illusion	misleading vision	It is easy to create an optical illusion in which lines of equal length appear different.
illusive	deceiving	This is only a mirage; let us not be fooled by its illusive effect.
illusory	deceptive; not real	Unfortunately, the costs of running the lemonade stand were so high that Tom's profits proved illusory.
imbalance	lack of balance or symmetry; disproportion	Because of the great imbalance between the number of men and women invited, the dance was unsuccessful.
imbecility	weakness of mind	I am amazed at the imbecility of the readers of these trashy magazines.
imbibe	drink in	The dry soil imbibed the rain quickly.
imbroglio	complicated situation; perplexity; entanglement	He was called in to settle the imbroglio but failed to bring harmony into the situation.
imbue	saturate, fill	His visits to the famous Gothic cathedrals imbued him with feelings of awe and reverence.
immaculate	pure; spotless	The West Point cadets were immaculate as they lined up for inspection.
imminent	near at hand; impending	Rosa was such a last-minute worker that she could never start writing a paper till the deadline was imminent.
immobility	state of being immovable	Modern armies cannot afford the luxury of immobility, as they are vulnerable to attack while standing still.
immolate	offer as a sacrifice	The tribal kind offered to immolate his daughter to quiet the angry gods.
immure	imprison; shut up in confinement For the two weeks before the examination, the student immureed himself in his room and concentrated	upon his studies.
immutable	unchangeable	Scientists are constantly seeking to discover the immutable laws of nature.
impair	worsen; diminish in value	This arrest will impair her reputation in the community.
impale	pierce	He was impaled by the spear hurled by his adversary.
impalpable	imperceptible; intangible	The ash is so fine that it is impalpable to the touch but it can be seen as a fine layer covering the window ledge.
impasse	predicament from which there is no escape	In this impasse, all turned to prayer as their last hope.
impassive	without feeling; not affected by pain	The Native American has been incorrectly depicted as an impassive individual, undemonstrative and stoical.
impeach	charge with crime in office; indict	The angry congressman wanted to impeach the President for his misdeeds.
impeccable	faultless	He was proud of his impeccable manners.
impecunious	without money	Now that he was wealthy, he gladly contributed to funds to assist impecunious and disbled persons.
impede	hinder; block	The special prosecutor determined that the Attorney General, though inept, had not intentionally set out to impede the progress of the investigation.
impediment	hindrance; stumbling-block	She had a speech impediment that prevented her from speaking clearly.
impending	nearing; approaching	The entire country was saddened by the news of his impending death.
impenetrable	not able to be pierced or entered	How could the murderer have gotten into the locked room? To Watson, the mystery, like the room, was impenetrable.
impenitent	not repentant	We could see by his brazen attitude that he was impenitent.
imperial	like an emperor; related to an empire	When hotel owner Leona Helmsley appeared in ads as Queen Leona standing guard over the Palace Hotel, her critics mocked her imperial fancies.
imperiousness	lordliness; domineering manner; arrogance	His imperiousness indicated that he had long been accustomed to assuming command.
impermeable	impervious; not permitting passage through its substance	This new material is impermeable to liquids.
impertinent	insolent	I regard your remarks as impertinent and I resent them.
imperturbable	calm; placid	Wellington remained imperturbable and in full command of the situation in spite of the hyteria and panic all around him.
impervious	not penetrable; not permitting passage through	You cannot change their habits for their minds are impervious to reasoning.
impetuous	violent; hasty; rash	We tried to curb his impetuous behavior because we felt that in his haste he might offend some people.
impetus	moving force; incentive; stimulus	A new federal highway program would create jobs and five added impetus to our economic recovery.
impiety	irreverence; wickedness	We must regard your blasphemy as an act of impiety.
impinge	infringe; touch; collide with	How could they be married without impinging on one another's freedom?
impious	irreverent	The congregation was offended by her impious remarks.
implacable	incapable of being pacified	Madame Defarge was the implacable enemy of the Evremonde family.
implausible	unlikely; unbelievable	Though her alibi seened implausible, it in fact turned out to be true.
implement	put into effect; supply with tools	The mayor was unwilling to implement the plan until she was sure it had the governor's backing.
implication	that which is hinted at or suggested	If I understand the implications of your remark, you do not trust our captain.
implicit	understood but not stated	Jack never told Jill he adored her; he believed his love was implicit in his deeds.
implore	beg	He implored her to give him a second chance.
imply	suggest a meaning not expressed	Even though your statement does not declare that you are at war with that country, your actions imply that that is the actual situation.
impolitic	not wise	I think it is impolitic to raise this issue at the present time because the public is too angry.
imponderable	weightless	I can evaluate the data gathered in this study; the imponderable items are not so easily analyzed.
import	significance	I feel that you have not grasped the full import of the message sent tous by the enemy.
importunate	urging; demanding	He tried to hide from his importunate creditors until his allowance arrived.
importune	beg persistently	Democratic and Republican phone solicitors importuned her for contributions so frequently that she decided to give nothing to either party.
imposture	assuming a false identity; masquerade	She was imprisoned for her imposture of a doctor.
impotent	weak; ineffective	Although he wished to break the nicotine habit, he found himself impotent in resisisting the craving for a cigarette.
imprecation	curse	Roused from the bed at what he considered an ungodly hour, Roy muttered imprecations under his breath.
impregnable	invulnerable	Until the development of the airplane as a military weapon, the fort was considered impregnable.
impromptu	without previous preparation	Her listeners were amazed that such a thorough presentation could be made in an impromptu speech.
impropriety	state of being inappropriate	Because of the impropriety of his costume, he was denied entrance into the dining room.
improvident	thriftless	He was constantly being warned to mend his improvident ways and begin to "save for a rainy day".
improvise	compose on the spur of the moment	She would sit at the piano and improvise for hours on themes from Bach and Handel.
imprudent	lacking caution; injudicious	It is imprudent to exercise vigorously and become overheated when you are unwell.
impugn	doubt; challenge; gainsay	I cannot impugn your honesty without evidence.
impuissance	powerlessness; feebleness	The lame duck President was frustrated by his shift from enormous power to relative impuissance.
impunity	freedom from punishment	The bully mistreated everyone in the class with impunity for he felt that no one would dare retaliate.
impute	attribute; ascribe	If I wished to impute blame to the officers in charge of this program, I would state my feelings definitely and immediately.
inadvertently	carelessly; unintentionally; by oversight	She inadvertently omitted two questions on the examination and mismarked her answer sheet.
inalienable	not to be taken away; nontransferable	The Declaration of Independence mentions the inalienable rights that all of us possess.
inane	silly; senseless	Such comments are inane because they do not help us solve our program.
inanimate	lifeless	she was asked to identify the still and inanimate body.
inarticulate	speechless; producing indistinct speech	He became inarticulate with rage and uttered sounds without meaning.
inaugurate	begin formally; install in office	The candidate promised that he would inaugurate a new nationwide health care plan as soon as he was inaugurated as president.
incandescent	stikingly bright; shining with intense heat	If you leave on an incandescent light bulb, it quickly grows too hot to touch.
incantation	singing or chanting of magical formula	Uttering incantations to make the brew more potent, the witch doctor stirred the liquid in the caldron.
incapacitate	disable	During the winter, many people were incapacitated by respiratory ailments.
incarcerate	imprison	The warden will incarcerate the felon after conviction.
incarnate	endowed with flesh; personified	Your attitude is so fiendish that you must be a devil incarnate.
incarnation	act of assuming a human body and human nature	The incarnation of Jesus Christ is a basic tenet of Christian theology.
incendiary	arsonist	The fire spread in such an unusual manner that the fire department chiefs were certain that it had been set by an incendiary.
incense	enrage; infuriate	Unkindness to children incensed her.
incentive	spur; motive	Students who dislike school must be given an incentive to learn.
inception	start; beginning	She was involved with the project from its inception.
incessant	uninterrupted	The crickets kept up an incessant chirping that disturbed our attempts to fall asleep.
inchoate	recently begun; rudimentary; elementary	Before the Creation, the world was an inchoate mass.
incidence	rate of occurrence; particular occurrence	Health professionals expressed great concern over the high incidence of infant mortality in major urban areas.
incidental	not essential; minor	The scholarship covered his major expenses at college and some of his incidental expenses as well.
incipient	beginning; in an early stage	I will go to sleep early for I want to break an incipient cold.
incisive	cutting; sharp	His incisive remarks made us see the fallacy in our plans.
incite	arouse to action	The demogogue incited the mob to take action into its own hands.
inclement	stormy; unkind	I like to read a good book in inclement weather.
incline	slope; slant	The architect recommended that the nursing home's ramp be rebuilt because its incline was too steep for wheelchairs.
inclined	tending or leaning toward; bent	Though I am inclined to be skeptical, the witness's manner inclines me to believe his story.
inclusive	tending to include all	The comedian turned down the invitation to join the Player's Club, saying any club that would let him in was too inclusive for him.
incognito	with identity concealed; using an assumed name	The monarch enjoyed traveling throughthe town incognito and mingling with the populace.
incoherent	unintelligible; muddled; illogical	The bereaved father sobbed and stammered, his words becoming almost incoherent in his grief.
incommodious	not spacious; inconvenient	In their incommodious quarters, they had to improvise for closet space.
incompatible	inharmonious	The married couple argued incessantly and finally decided to separate because they were incompatible.
incongruity	lack of harmony; absurdity	The incongruity of his wearing sneakers with formal attire amused the observers.
inconsequential	insignificant; unimportant	Brushing off Ali's apologies for having broken the wine glass, Tamara said, "Don't worry about it; it's inconsequential".
inconsistency	state of being self-contradictory; lack of uniformity or steadiness	How are lawyers different from agricultural inspectors? Where lawyers check inconsistencies in witnesses' statements, agricultural inspectors check inconsistencies in Grade A eggs.
incontinent	lacking self-restraint	His incontinent behavior off stage shocked many people and they refused to attend the plays and movies in which he appeared.
incontrovertible	indisputable	We must yield to the incontrovertible evidence that you have presented and free your client.
incorporate	introduce something into a larger whole; combine; unite	Breaking with precedent, President Truman ordered the military to incorporate blacks into every branch of the armed services.
incorporeal	immaterial; without a material body	We must devote time to the needs of our incorporeal mind as well as our corporeal body.
incorrigible	uncorrectable	Though Widow Douglass hoped to reform Huck, Miss Watson pronounced him incorrigible and said he would come to no good end.
incredulity	a tendency to disbelief	Your incredulity in the face of all the evidence is hard to understand.
incredulous	withholding belief; skeptical When Jack claimed he hadn't eaten the jelly doughnut, Jill took an incredulous look at his smeared face and	laughed.
increment	increase	The new contract calls for a 10 percent increment in salary for each employee for the next two years.
incriminate	accuse; serve as evidence against	The witness's testimony against the racketeers incriminates some high public officials as well.
incubate	hatch; scheme	Inasmuch as our supply of electricity is cut off, we shall have to rely on the hens to incubate these eggs.
incubus	burden; mental care; nightmare	The incubus of financial worry helped bring on her nervous breakdown.
incumbent	officeholder	The newly elected public official received valuable advice from the present incumbent.
incur	bring upon oneself	His parents refused to pay any future debts he might incur.
incursion	temporary invasion	The nightly incursions and hit-and-run raids of our neighbors across the border tried the patience of the country to the point where we decided to retaliate in force.
indefatigable	tireless	He was indefatigable in his constant efforts to raise funds for the Red Cross.
indemnify	make secure against loss; compensate for loss	The city will indemnify all home owners whose property is spoiled by this project.
indenture	bind as servant or apprentice to master	Many immigrants could come to America only after they had indentured themselves for several years.
indeterminate	uncertain; not clearly fixed; indefinite	That interest rates shall rise appears certain; when they will do so, however, remains indeterminate.
indicative	suggestive; implying	A lack of appetite may be indicative of a major mental or physical disorder.
indict	charge	If the grand jury indicts the suspect, he will go to trial.
indifferent	unmoved; lacking concern	Because she felt no desire to marry, she was indifferent to his constant proposals.
indigence	poverty	Neither the economists nor the political scientists have found a way to wipe out the inequities of wealth and eliminate indigence from our society.
indigenous	native	Tobacco is one of the indigenous plants that the early explorers found in this country.
indignation	anger ar an injustice	He felt indignation at the ill-treatment of the helpless animals.
indignity	offensive or insulting treatment	Although he seemed to accept cheerfully the indignities heaped upon him, he was inwardly very angry.
indiscriminate	choosing at random; confused	She disapproved of her son's indiscriminate television viewing and decided to restrict him to educational programs.
indisputable	too certain to be disputed	In the face of these indisputable statements, I withdraw my complaint.
indissoluble	permanent	The indissoluble bonds of marriage are all too often being dissolved.
indite	write; compose	Cyrano indited many letters for Christian.
indolence	laziness	He outgrew his youthful indolence to become a model of industry and alertness on the job.
indomitable	unconquerable	The founders of our country had indomitable willpower.
indubitably	beyond a doubt	Because her argument was indubitably valid, the judge accepted it.
induce	persuade; bring about	After the quarrel, Tina said nothing could induce her to talk to Tony again.
inductive	pertaining to induction or preceeding from the specific to the general	The discovery of the planet Pluto is an excellent example of the results that can be obtained from inductive reasoning.
indulgent	humoring; yielding; lenient	indulgent parents spoil their children by giving in to their every whim.
inebriety	habitual intoxication	Because of his inebriety, he was discharged from his position as family chauffeur.
ineffable	unutterable; cannot be expressed in speech	Such ineffable joy must be experienced; it cannot be described.
ineffectual	not effective; weak	Because the candidate failed to get across his message to the public, his campaign was ineffectual.
ineluctable	irresistable; not to be escaped	He felt that his fate was ineluctible and refused to make any attempt to improve his lot.
inept	lacking skill; inadequate; inappropriate	inept as a carpenter, Ira was all thumbs.
inequity	unfairness	In demanding equal pay for equal work, women protest the basic inequity of a system that allots greater financial rewards to men.
inerrancy	infallibility	Jane refused to believe in the pope's inerrancy, reasoning: "All human beings are capable of error. The pope is a human being. Therefore, he pope is capable of error.
inertia	state of being inert or indisposed to move	Our inertia in this matter may prove disastrous; we must move to aid our allies immediately.
inevitable	unavoidable	Death and taxes are both inevitable.
inexorable	relentless; unyielding; implacable	After listening to the pleas for clemency, the judge was inexorable and gave the convicted man the maximum punishment allowed by law.
infallible	unerring	We must remember that none of us is infallible; we all make mistakes.
infamous	notoriously bad	Jesse James was an infamous outlaw.
infantile	childish; infantlike	When will he outgrow such infantile behavior?
infer	deduce; conclude	We must be particularly cautious when we infer that a person is guilty on the basis of circumstantial evidence.
infernal	pertaining to hell; devilish	They could think of no way to hinder his infernal scheme.
infidel	unbeliever	The Saracens made war against tne infidels.
infiltrate	pass into or through; penetrate (an organization) sneakily	In order to infiltrate enemy lines at night without being seen, the scouts darkened their faces and wore black coveralls.
infinitesimal	very small	In the twentieth century, physicists have made their greatest discoveries about the characteristics of infinitesimal objects like the atom and its parts.
infirmity	weakness	Her greatest infirmity was lack of willpower.
inflated	exaggerated; pompous; enlarged (with air or gas)	His claims about the new product were inflated; it did not work as well as he had promised.
influx	flowing into	The influx of refugees into the country has taxed the relief agencies severely.
infraction	violation	Because of his many infractions of school regulations, he was suspended by the dean.
infringe	violate; encroach	I think your machine infringes on my patent and intend to sue.
ingenious	clever	He came up with a use for Styrofoam packing balls that was so ingenious that his business school professors declared it was marketable.
ingenuous	naive; young and unsophisticated	Although she was over forty, the movie star still insisted that she be cast as an ingenuous sweet young thing.
ingrained	deeply established; firmly rooted	Try as they would, the missionaries were unable to uproot the ingrained superstitions of the natives.
ingrate	ungrateful person	That ingrate Bob sneered at the tie I gave him.
ingratiate	become popular with	He tried to ingratiate himself into her parents' good graces.
inherent	firmly established by nature or habit	His inherent love of justice compelled him to come to their aid.
inhibit	prohibit; restrain	The child was not inhibited in her responses.
inimical	unfriendly; hostile	She felt that they were inimical and were hoping for her downfall.
inimitable	matchless; not able to be imitated	We admire Auden for his inimitable use of language; he is one of a kind.
iniquitous	unjust; wicked	I cannot approve of the iniquitous methods you used to gain your present position.
initiate	begin; originate; receive into a group	The college is about to initiate a program for reducing math anxiety among students.
injurious	harmful	Smoking cigarettes can be injurious to your health.
inkling	hint	This came as a complete surprise to me as I did not have the slightest inkling of your plans.
innate	inborn	His innate talent for music was soon recognized by his parents.
innocuous	harmless	Let him drink it; it is innocuous and will have no ill effect.
innovation	change; introduction of something new	She loved innovatins just because they were new.
innuendo	hint; insinuation	I can defend myself against direct accusations; innuendos and oblique attacks on my character are what trouble me.
inopportune	untimely; poorly chosen	A rock concert is an inopportune setting for a quiet conversation.
inordinate	unrestrained; excessive	She had an inordinate fondness for candy.
inquisitive	unduly curious; prying; seeking knowledge	We need more inquisitive students in this school; lectures are dull.
inquisitor	questioner (specially harsh); investigator	Fearing being grilled ruthlessly by the secret police, Marsha faced her inquisitors with trepidation.
insalubrious	unwholesome; not healthful	The mosquito-ridden swamp was an insalubrious place, a breeding ground for malarial contagion.
insatiable	not easily satisfied; greedy	Welty's thirst for knowledge was insatiable; she was in the library day and night.
inscrutable	impenetrable; not readily understood; mysterious	Experienced poker players try to keep their expressions inscrutable, hiding their reactions to the cards behind a so-called poker face.
insensate	without feeling	She lay there as insensate as a log.
insensible	unconscious; unresponsive	Sherry and I are very different; at times when I would be covered with embarrassment, she seems insensible to shame.
insidious	treacherous; stealthy; sly	The fifth column is insidious because it works secretly within our territory for our defeat.
insinuate	hint; imply	What are you trying to insinuate by that remark?
insipid	lacking in flavor; dull	Flat prose and flat ginger ale are equally insipid: both lack sparkle.
insolence	imprudent disrespect; haughtiness	How dare you treat me so rudely! The manager will hear of you insolence.
insolvent	bankrupt; lacking money to pay	When rumors that he was insolvent reached his creditors, they began to press him for payment of the money due them.
insomnia	wakefulness; inability to sleep	He refused to join us in a midnight cup of coffee because he claimed it gave him insomnia.
insouciant	indifferent; without concern or care	Your insouciant attitude at such a critical moment indicates that you do not understand the gravity of the situation.
instigate	urge; start; provoke	I am afraid that this statement will instigate a revolt.
insubordinate	disobedient	The insubordinate private was confined to the barracks.
insubstantial	lacking substance; insignificant; frail	His hopes for a career in acting proved insubstantial; no one would cast him, even in an insubstantial role.
insularity	narrow-mindedness; isolation	The insularity of the islanders manifested itself in their suspicion of anyuthing foreign.
insuperable	insurmountable; invincible	In the face of insuperable difficulties they maintained their courage and will to resist.
insurgent	rebellious	We will not discuss reforms until the insurgent troops have returned to their homes.
insurrection	rebellion; uprising	Given the current state of affairs in South Africa, an insurrection seems unavoidable.
intangible	not able to be perceived by touch; vague	Though the financial benefits of his Oxford post were meager, Lewis was drawn to it by its intangible rewards: prestige, intellectual freedom, the fellowship of his peers.
integral	complete; necessary for completeness	Physical education is an integral part of our curriculum; a sound mind and a sound body are complementary.
integrate	make whole; combine; make into one unit	She tried to integrate all their activities into one program.
integrity	uprightness; wholeness	Lincoln, whose personal integrity has inspired millions, fought a civil war to maintain the integrity of the republic, that these United States might remain undivided for all time.
intellect	higher mental powers	He thought college would develop his intellect.
intelligentsia	intellectuals; members of the educated elite	She preferred discussions about sports and politics to the literary conversations of the intelligentsia.
inter	bury	They are going to inter the body tomorrow ar Broadlawn Cemetry.
interdict	prohibit; forbid	Civilized nations must interdict the use of nuclear weapons if we expect out society to live.
interim	meantime	The company will not consider our proposal until next week; in the interim, let us proceed as we have in the past.
interloper	intruder	The merchant thought of his competitors as interlopers who were stealing away his trade.
interminable	endless	Although his speech lasted for only twenty minutes, it seemed interminable to his bored audience.
intermittent	periodic; on and off	Our picnic was marred by intermittent rains.
internecine	mutually destructive	The rising death toll on both sides indicates the internecine natire of his conflict.
interpolate	insert between	She talked so much that I could not interpolate a single remark.
interregnum	period between two reigns	Henry VIII desperately sought a male heir because he feared the civil strife that might occur if any prolonged interregum succeeded his death.
interrogate	question closely; cross-examine	Knowing that the Nazis would interrogate him about his background, the secret agent invented a cover story that would help him meet their quesions.
intersperse	scatter	The molecules will intersperse throughout the space according to the second law of thermodynamics.
intervene	come between	She intervened in the argument between her two sons.
intimate	hint	She intimated rather than stated her preferences.
intimidation	fear	A ruler who maintains his power by intimidation is bound to develop clandestine resistance.
intractable	unruly; refractory	The horse was intractable and refused to enter the starting gate.
intransigence	state of stubborn unwillingness to compromise	The intransigence of both parties in the dispute makes an early settlement almost impossible to obtain.
intrepid	fearless	For his intrepid conduct in battle, he was promoted.
intrinsically	essentially; inherently; naturally	Although my grandmother's china has intrinsically little value, I shall always cherish it for the memories it evokes.
introspective	looking within oneself	We all have our introspective moments during which we examine our souls.
introvert	one who is introspective; inclined to think more about oneself	In his poetry, he reveals that he is an introvert by his intense interest in his own problems.
intrude	trespass; enter as an uninvited person	She hesitated to intrude on their conversation.
intuition	power of knowing without reasoning	She claimed to know the truth by intuition.
inundate	overflow; flood	The tremendous waves inundated the town.
inured	accustomed; hardened	She became inured to the Alaskan cold.
invalidate	weaken; destroy	The relatives who received little or nothing sought to invalidate the will by claiming that the deceased had not been in his right mind when he signed the document.
invective	abuse	He had expected criticism but not the invective that greeted his proposal.
inveigh	denounce; utter censure or invective He inveighed against the demagoguery of the previous speaker and urged that the audience reject his	philosophy as dangerous.
inveigle	lead astray; wheedle	She was inveigled into joining the club after an initial reluctance.
inverse	opposite	There is an inverse ratio between the strength of light and its distance.
invert	turn upside down or inside out	When he inverted his body in a hand stand, he felt the blood rush to his head.
inveterate	deep-rooted; habitual	She is an inveterate smoker and cannot break the habit.
invidious	designed to create ill will or envy	We disregarded her invidious remarks because we realized how jealous she was.
invincible	unconquerable	Superman is invincible.
inviolability	security from being destroyed, corrupted or profaned	They respected the inviolability of her faith and did not try to change her manner of living.
invoke	call upon; ask for	She invoked her advisor's aid in filling out her financial aid forms.
invulnerable	incapable of injury	Achilles was invulnerable except in his heel.
iota	very small quantity	She hadn't an iota of common sense.
irascible	irritable; easily angered	Her irascible temper frightened me.
irate	angry	When John's mother found out that he had overthrown his checking account for the third month in a row, she was so irate that she could scarcely speak to him.
iridescent	exhibiting rainbowlike colors	She admired the iridescent hues of the oil that floated on the surface of the water.
irksome	annoying; tedious	He found working on the assembly line irksome because of the monotony of the operation he had to perform.
ironic	occurring in an unexpected and contrary manner	It is ironic that his success came when he least wanted it.
irony	hidden sarcasm or satire; use of words that convey a meaning opposite to the literal meaning	Gradually his listeners began to realize that the excessive praise he was lavishing was merely irony; he was actually denouncing his opponent.
irreconsilable	incompatible; not able to be resolved	Because the separated couple were irreconcilable, the marriage counselor recommended a divorce.
irrelevant	not applicable; unrelated	This statement is irrelevant and should be disregarded by the jury.
irremediable	incurable; uncorrectable	The error she made was irremediable; she could see no way to repair it.
irreparable	not able to be corrected or repaired	Your apology cannot atone for the irreparable damage you have done to her reputation.
irrepressible	unable to be restrained or held back	Her high spirits were irrepressible.
irresolute	uncertain how to act; weak	She had no respect for him because he seemed weak-willed and irresolute.
irreverent	lacking proper respect	The worshippers resented her irreverent remarks about their faith.
irrevocable	unalterable	Let us not brood over past mistakes since they are irrevocable.
isotope	varying form of an element	The study of the isotopes of uranium led to the development of the nuclear bomb.
isthmus	narrow neck of land connecting two larger bodies of land	In a magnificent feat of engineering, Goethals and his men cut through the isthmus of Panama in constructing the Panama Canal.
itinerant	wandering; traveling	He was an itinerant peddler and traveled through Pennsylvania and Virginia selling his wares.
itinerary	plan of a trip	Before leaving for his first visit to France and England, he discussed his itinerary with people who had been there and with his travel agent.
jaded	fatigued; surfeited	He looked for exotic foods to stimulate his jaded appetite.
jargon	language used by special group; gibberish	We tried to understand the jargon of the peddlers in the market place but could not find any basis for comprehension.
jaundiced	yellowed; prejudiced; envious	She gazed at the painting with jaundiced eyes; she knew it was better than hers.
jaunt	trip; short journey	He took a quick jaunt to Atlantic City.
jaunty	lighthearted; animated; easy and carefree	In Singing in the Rain, Gene Kelly sang and danced his way throughtthe lighthearted title number in a properly jaunty style.
jeopardy	exposure to death or danger	Legally, one cannot be placed in double jeopardy.
jettison	throw overboard	In order to enable the ship to ride safely through the storm, the captain had to jettison much of his cargo.
jingoism	extremely aggressive and militant patriotism	We must be careful to prevent a spirit of jingoism from spreading at this time.
jocose	given to joking	The salesman was so jocose that many of his customers suggested that he become a stand-up comic.
jocular	said or done in jest	Do not take my jocular remarks seriously.
jocund	merry	Santa Claus is always vivacious and jocund.
jollity	gaiety; cheerfulness	The festive Christmas dinner was a merry one, and old and young alike joined in the general jollity.
jostle	shove; bump	In the subway he was jostled by the crowds.
jovial	good natured; merry	A frown seemed out of place on his invariably jovial face.
jubilation	rejoicing	There was great jubilitation when the armistice was announced.
judicious	sound in judgment; wise	At a key moment in his life, he made a judicious investment that was the foundation of his later wealth.
juggernaut	irresistible crushin force	Nothing could survive in the path of the juggernaut.
juncture	crisis;joining point	At this critical juncture, let us think carefully before determining the course we shall follow.
junket	trip, especially one taken for pleasure by an official at public expense	Though she maintained she had gone abroad to collect firsthand data on the Common Market, the opposition claimed that her trip was merely a political junket.
junta	group of persons joined in political intrigue; cabal	As soon as he learned of its existence, the dictator ordered the execution of all of the members of the junta.
jurisprudence	science of law	He was more a student of jurisprudence than a practitioner of the law.
juxtapose	place side by side	Comparison will be easier if you juxtapose the two objects.
kaleidoscope	tube in which patterns made by the reflection in mirrors of colored pieces of glass, etc.,	produce interesting symmetrical effects People found a new source of entertainment while peering through the kaleidoscope; they found the ever- changing patterns fascinating.
ken	range of knowledge	I cannot answer your question since this matter is beyond my ken.
killjoy	grouch; spoilsport	At breakfast we had all been enjoying our bacon and eggs until that killjoy John started talking about how bad animal fats and cholesterol were for our health.
kindle	start a fire; inspire	Her teacher's praise kindled a spark a hope inside her.
kindred	related; similar in nature or character	Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn were two kindred spirits.
kinetic	producing motion	Designers of the electric automobile find that their greatest obstacle lies in the development of light and efficient storage batteries, the source of the kinetic energy needed to propel the vehicle.
kismet	fate	kismet is the Arabic word for "fate".
kleptomaniac	person who has a compulsive desire to steal	They discovered that the wealthy customer was a kleptomaniac when they caught her stealing some cheap trinkets.
knavery	rascality	We cannot condone such knavery in public officials.
knead	mix; work dough	Her hands grew strong from kneading bread.
knell	tolling of a bell, especially to indicate a funeral, disaster, etc.; sound of the funeral bell	"The curfew tolls the knell of parting day".
knit	contract into wrinkles	Whenever David worries, his brow knits in a frown.
knoll	little, round hill	Robert Louis Stevenson's grave is on a knoll in Samoa; to reach the grave site, you must climb uphill and walk a short distance along a marked path.
knotty	intricate; difficult; tangled	What to Watson had been a knotty problem to Sherlock Holmes was simplicity itself.
kudos	honor; glory; praise	The singer complacently received kudos on his performance from his entourage.
labile	likely to change; unstable	Because the hormonal changes they undergo affect their spirits, adolescents may become emotionally labile and experience sudden shifts of mood.
laborious	demanding much work or care; tedious	In putting together his dictionary of the English language, Doctor Johnson undertook a laborious task.
labyrinth	maze	Tom and Becky were lost in the labyrinth of secret caves.
lacerate	mangle; tear	Her body was lacerated in the automobile crash.
lachrymose	producing tears	His voice has a lachrymose quality that is more appropriate at a funeral than a class reunion.
lackadaisical	affectedly languid	He was lackadaisical and indifferent about his part in the affair.
lackluster	dull	We were disappointed by the lackluster performance.
laconic	brief and to the point	Many of the characters portrayed by Clint Eastwood are laconic types: strong men of few words.
laggard	slow; sluggish	The sailor had been taught not to be laggard in carrying out orders.
lagoon	shallow body of water near a sea; lake	They enjoyed their swim in the calm lagoon.
laity	laypersons; persons not connected with the clergy	The laity does not always understand the clergy's problems.
lambaste	beat; thrash verbally or physically	It was painful to watch the champion lambaste his opponent, tearing into him mercilessly.
lament	grieve; express sorrow	Even advocates of the war lamented the loss of so many lives in combat.
lampoon	ridicule	This article lampoons the pretensions of some movie moguls.
languid	weary; sluggish; listless	Her siege of illness left her languid and pallid.
languish	lose animation; lose strength	In stories, lovelorn damsels used to languish and pine away.
languor	lassitude; depression	His friends tried to overcome the languor into which he had fallen by taking him to parties and to the theater.
lank	long and thin	lank, gaunt, Abraham Lincoln was a striking figure.
larceny	theft	Because of the prisoner's record, the district attorney refused to reduce the charge from grand larceny to petit larceny.
larder	pantry; place where food is kept	The first thing Bill did on returning home from school was to check what snacks his mother had in the larder.
largess	generous gift	Lady Bountiful distributed largess to the poor.
lascivious	lustful	Because they might arouse lascivious impulses in their readers, the lewd books were banned by the clergy.
lassitude	languor; weariness	The hot, tropical weather created a feeling of lassitude and encouraged drowsiness.
latent	dormant; hidden	Her latent talent was discovered by accident.
lateral	coming from the side	In order to get good plant growth, the gardener must pinch off all lateral shoots.
latitude	freedom from narrow limitations	I think you have permitted your son too much latitude in this matter.
laudable	praiseworthy; commendable	His laudable deeds will be remarked by all whom he aided.
laudatory	expressing praise	The critics' laudatory comments helped to make her a star.
lavish	liberal; wasteful	The actor's lavish gifts pleased her.
lax	careless	We dislike restaurants where the service is lax and inattentive.
laxative	facilitating evacuation of the bowels	The effect of the constipation medicine is laxative; it empties the bowels.
leaven	cause to rise or grow lighter; enliven	As bread dough is leavened, it puffs up, expanding in volume.
lechery	gross lewdness; lustfulness	In his youth he led a life of lechery and debauchery; he did not mend his ways until middle age.
lectern	reading desk	The chaplain delivered his sermon from a hastily improvised lectern.
leery	suspicious; cautious	Don't eat sushi at this restaurant; I'm a bit leery about how fresh it is.
leeway	room to move; margin	When you set a deadline, allow a little leeway.
legacy	a gift made by a will	Part of my legacy from my parents is an album of family photographs.
legend	explanatory list of symbols on a map	The legend at the bottom of the map made it clear which symbols stood for rest areas along the highway and which stood for public camp sites.
legerdemain	sleight of hand	The magician demonstrated his renowned legerdemain.
leniency	mildness; permissiveness	Considering the gravity of the offense, we were surprised by the leniency of the sentence.
leonine	like a lion	He was leonine in his rage.
lethal	deadly	It is unwise to leave lethal weapons where children may find them.
lethargic	drowsy; dull	The stuffy room made her lethargic; she felt as if she was about to nod off.
levee	earthen or stone embankment to prevent flooding	As the river rose and threatened to overflow the levee, emergency workers rushed to reinforce the walls with sandbags.
levitate	float in the air (especially by magical means)	As the magician passed his hands over the recumbent body of his assistant, she appeared to rise and levitate about three feet above the table.
levity	lack of seriousness or steadiness; frivolity	Stop giggling abd wriggling around in the pew; such levity is improper in church.
levy	impose (a fine); collect (a payment)	Crying "No taxation withouth representation," the colonists demonstrated against England's power to levy taxes.
lewd	lustful	They found his lewd stories objectionable.
lexicographer	compiler of a dictionary	The new dictionary is the work of many lexicographers who spent years compiling and editing the work.
lexicon	dictionary	I cannot find this word in any lexicon in the library.
liability	drawback; debts	Her lack of an extensive vocabulary was a liability that she was able to overcome.
liaison	officer who acts as go-between for two armies; intermediary	As the liason, he had to avoid offending the leaders of the two armies.
libelous	defamatory; injurious to the good name of a person	He sued the newspaper because of its libelous story.
libertine	debauched person, roue Although she was aware of his reputation as a libertine, she felt she could reform him and help him break	his dissolute way of life.
libidinous	lustful	They objected to his libidinous behavior.
libido	emotional urges behind human activity	The psychiatrist maintained that suppression of the libido often resulted in maladjustment and neuroses.
libretto	text of an opera	The composer of an opera's music is remembered more frequently than the author of its libretto.
licentious	wanton; lewd; dissolute	The licentious monarch helped bring about his country's downfall.
lien	legal claim on a property	There was a delay before Ralph could take possession of his late uncle's home; apparently, another claimant had a lien upon the estate.
ligneous	like wood	Petrified wood may be ligneous in appearance, but it is stonelike in composition.
lilliputian	extremely small	Tiny and delicate, the model was built on a lilliputian scale.
limber	flexible	Hours of ballet classes kept him limber.
limbo	region near heaven or hell where certain souls are kept	Among the divisions of Hell are Purgatory and limbo.
limn	draw; outline; describe	Parodoxically, the more realistic the details this artist chooses, the better able to limn her fantastic, other- worldly landscapes.
limpid	clear	A limpid stream ran through his property.
lineage	descent; ancestry	He traced his lineage back to Mayflower days.
lineaments	features, especially of the face	She quickly sketched the lineaments of his face.
linguistic	pertaining to language	The modern tourist will encounter very little linguistic difficulty as English has become an almost universal language.
lionize	treat as a celebrity	She enjoyed being lionized and adored by the public.
liquidate	settle accounts; clear up	He was able to liquidate all his debts in short period of time.
list	tilt; lean over	That flagpole should be absolutely vertical; instead, it lists to one side.
listless	lacking in spirit or energy	We had expected him to be full of enthusiasm and were surprised by his listless attitude.
litany	supplicatory prayer	On this solemn day, the congregation responded to the prayers of the priest during the litany with fervor and intensity.
lithe	flexible; supple	Her figure was lithe and willowy.
litigation	lawsuit	Try to settle this amicably; I do not want to start litigation.
litotes	understatement for emphasis	To say, "He little realizes," when we mean that he does not realize at all, is an example of the kind of understatement we call litotes.
livid	lead-coloredl; black and blue; ashen; enraged	His face was so livid with rage that we were afraid that he might have an attack of apoplexy.
loath	averse; reluctant	They were both loath for him to go.
loathe	detest	We loathed the wicked villain.
lode	metal-bearing vein	If this lode that we have discovered extends for any distance, we have found a fortune.
lofty	very high	They used to tease him about his lofty ambitions.
loiter	hang around; linger	The policeman told him not to loiter in the alley.
loll	lounge about	They lolled around in their chairs watching television.
longevity	long life	When he reached ninety, the old man was proud of his longevity.
lope	gallop slowly	As the horses loped along, we had an opportunity to admire the ever-changing scenery.
loquacious	talkative	She is very loquacious and can speak on the telephone for hours.
lout	clumsy person	The delivery boy is an awkward lout.
low	moo	From the hilltop, they could see the herd like ants in the distance; they could barely hear the cattle low.
lucid	easily understood; clear; intelligible	Her explanation was lucid enought for a child to grasp.
lucrative	profitable	He turned his hobby into a lucrative profession.
lucre	money	Preferring lucre to undying fame, he wrote stories of popular appeal.
ludicrous	laughable; trifling	Let us be serious; this is not a ludicrous issue.
lugubrious	mournful	The lugabrious howling of the dogs added to our sadness.
lull	moment of calm	Not wanting to get wet, they waited under the awning for a lull in the rain.
lumber	move heavily of clumsily	Still somewhat torpid after its long hibernation, the bear lumbered through the woods.
lumen	unit of light energy (one candle's worth)	In buying light bulbs, she checked not only their power, as measured in watts, but their brightness, as measured in lumens.
luminary	celebrity; dignitary	A leading light of the American stage, Ethel Barrymore was a theatrical luminary whose name lives on.
luminous	shining; issuing light	The sun is a luminous body.
lunar	pertaining to the moon	lunar craters can be plainly seen with the aid of a small telescope.
lurid	wild; sensational	The lurid stories he told shocked his listeners.
lurk	stealthily lie in waiting; slink; exist unperceived	"Who knows what evils lurk in the hearts of men? The shadow knows".
luscious	pleasing to taste or smell	The ripe peach was luscious.
luster	shine; gloss	The soft luster of the silk in the dim light was pleasing.
lustrous	shining	Her large and lustrous eyes gave a touch of beauty to an otherwise drab face.
luxuriant	fertile; abundant; ornate	Farming was easy in this luxuriant soil.
macabre	gruesome; grisly	The city morgue is a macabre spot for the uninitiated.
mace	ceremonial staff; clublike medieval weapon	The Grand Marshal of the parade raised his mace to signal that it was time for the procession to begin.
macerate	soften by soaking in liquid; waste away	The strawberries had been soaking in the champagn for so long that they had begun to macerate: they literally fell apart at the touch of a spoon.
machiavellian	crafty; double-dealing	I do not think he will be a good embassador because he is not accustomed to the machiavellian maneuverings of foreign diplomats.
machinations	schemes	I can see through your wily machinations.
maculated	spotted; stained	Instead of writing that Gorbachev had a birthmark on his forehead, the pompous young poet sang of the former premier's maculated brow.
madrigal	pastoral song	His program of folk songs included several madrigals which he sang to the accompaniment of a lute.
maelstrom	whirlpool	The canoe was tossed about in the maelstrom.
magisterial	authoritative; imperious	The learned doctor laid down the law to his patient in a magisterial tone of voice.
magnanimity	generosity	Noted for his magnanimity, philanthropist Eugene Lang donated millions to charity.
magnate	person of prominence or influence	The steel magnate decided to devote more time to city politics.
magniloquent	boastful, pompous	In their stories of the trial, the reporters ridiculed the magniloquent speeches of the defense attorney.
magnitude	greatness; extent	It is difficult to comprehend the magnitude of his crime.
maim	mutilate; injure	The hospital could not take care of all who had been mangled or maimed in the railroad accident.
maladroit	clumsy; bungling	In his usual maladroit way, he managed to upset the cart and spill the food.
malaise	uneasiness; distress	She felt a sudden vague malaise when she heard sounds at the door.
malapropism	comic misuse of a word	When Mrs. Malaprop criticizes Lydia for being "as headstrong as an allegory on the banks of the Nile," she confuses "allegory" and "allegator" in a typical malapropism.
malcontent	person dissatisfied with existing state of affairs	He was one of the few malcontents in the Congress; he constantly voiced his objections to the Presidential program.
malediction	curse	The witch uttered maledictions against her captors.
malefactor	criminal	We must try to bring these malefactors to justice.
malevolent	wishing evil	We must thwart his malevolent schemes.
malfeasance	wrongdoing	The authorities did not discover the campaign manager's malfeasance until after he had spent most of the money he had embezzled.
malicious	dictated by hatred or spite	The malicious neighbor spread the gossip.
malign	speak evil of; defame	Because of her hatred of the family, she maligns all who are friendly to them.
malignant	having an evil influence; virulent	This is a malignant disease; we must have to use drastic measures to stop its spread.
malingerer	one who feigns illness to escape duty	The captain ordered the sergeant to punish all malingerers and force them to work.
malleable	capable of being shaped by pounding	Gold is a malleable metal.
malodorous	foul-smelling	The component heap was most malodorous in summer.
mammal	vertebrate animal whose female suckles its young	Many people regard the whale as a fish and do not realize that it is a mammal.
mammoth	gigantic	The mammoth corporations of the twentieth century are a mixed blessing
manacle	restrain; handcuff	The police immediately manacled the prisoner so he could not escape.
mandate	order; charge	In his inaugural address, the President stated that he had a mandate from the people to seek an end to social evils such as poverty and poor housing.
mandatory	obligatory	These instructions are mandatory; any violation will be severely punished.
mangy	shabby; wretched	We finally thew out the mangy rug that the dog had destroyed.
maniacal	raving mad	His maniacal laughter frightened us.
manifest	understandable; clear	His evil intentions were manifest and yet we could not stop him.
manifestation	outward demonstration; indication	Mozart's early attraction to the harsichord was the first manifestation of his pronounced musical bent.
manifesto	declaration; statement of policy	The Communist Manifesto by Marx and Engels proclaimed the principles of modern communism.
manifold	numerous; varied	I cannot begin to tell you how much I appreciate your manifold kindnesses.
manipulate	operate with the hands; control or change by artful means	How do you manipulate these puppets?
mannered	affected; not natural	Attempting to copy the style of his wealthy neighbors, Gatsby adopted a mannered, artificial way of speech.
manumit	emancipate; free from bondage	Enlightened slave owners were willing to manumit their slaves and thus put an end to the evil slavery in the country.
marital	pertaining to marriage	After the publication of his book on marital affairs, he was often consulted by married people on the verge of divorce.
maritime	bordering on the sea; nautical	The maritime Provinces depend on the sea for their wealth.
marked	noticeable; targeted for vengeance	He walked with a marked limp, a souvenir of an old IRA attack. As British ambassador, he knew he was a marked man.
marred	damaged; disfigured	She had to refinish the marred surface of the table.
marshal	put in order	At a debate tournament, extemporaneous speakers have only a minute or two to marshal their thoughts before addressing their audience.
marsupial	one of a family of mammals that nurse their offspring in a pouch	The most common marsupial in North America is the opposum.
martial	warlike	The sound of marital music was always inspiring to the young poet.
martinet	strict disciplinarian	The commanding officer was a martinet who observed each regulation to the ltter.
martrix	point of origin; array of numbers or algebraic symbols; mold or die	Some historians claim the Nile Valley was the matrix of the Western civilization.
masochist	person who enjoys his own pain	The masochist begs, "Hit me". The sadist smiles and says, "I won't".
masticate	chew	We must masticate our food carefully and slowly in order to avoid digestive disorders.
materialism	preoccupation with physical comforts and things	By its nature, materialism is opposed to idealism, for where the materialist emphasizes the needs of the body, the idealist emphasizes the needs of the soul.
maternal	motherly	Many animals display maternal instincts only while their offspring are young and helpless.
matriarch	woman who rules a family or larger social group	The matriarch ruled her gypsy tribe with a firm hand.
maudlin	effusively sentimental	I do not like such maudlin pictures. I call them tearjerkers.
maul	handle roughly	The rock star was mauled by his overexcited fans.
mausoleum	monumental tomb	His body was placed in the family mausolem.
mauve	pale purple	The mauve tint in the lilac bush was another indication that spring had finally arrived.
maverick	rebel; nonconformist	To the masculine literary establishment, George Sand with her insistence on wearing trousers and smoking cigars was clearly a maverick who fought her proper womanly role.
mawkish	sickening; insipid	Your mawkish sighs fill me with disgust.
maxim	proverb; a truth pithily stated	Aesop's fables illustrate moral maxims.
mayhem	injury to the body	The riot was marked not only by mayhem, with its attendant loss of life and limb, but also by arson and pillage.
meager	scanty; inadequate	His salary was far too meager for him to afford to buy a new car.
mealymouthed	indirect speech; hypocritical; evasive	Rather than tell Jill directly what he disliked, Jack made a few mealymouthed comments and tried to change the subject.
meander	to wind or turn in its course	It is difficult to sail up this stream because of the way it meanders through the countryside.
meddlesome	interfering	He felt his marriage was suffering because of his meddlesome mother-in-law.
mediate	settle a dispute through the services of an outsider	Let us mediate out differences rather than engage in a costly strike.
mediocre	ordinary; commonplace	We were disappointed because he gave a rather mediocre performance in this role.
meditation	reflection; thought	She reached her decision only after much meditation.
medley	mixture	The band played a medley of Gershwin tunes.
meek	submissive; patient and long-suffering	Mr. Barrett never expected his meek daughter would dare to defy him by eloping with her suitor.
megalomania	mania for doing grandiose things	Developers who spend millions trying to build the world's tallest skyscraper suffer from megalomania.
melee	fight	The captain tried to ascertain the cause of the melee that had broken out among the crew members.
mellifluous	flowing smoothly; smooth	Italian is a mellifluous language.
memento	token; reminder	Take this book as a memento of your visit.
memorialize	commemorate	Let us memorialize his great contribution by dedicating this library in his honor.
mendacious	lying; false	He was pathological liar, and his friends learned to discount his mendacious stories.
mendicant	beggar	From the moment we left the ship, we were surrounded by mendicants and peddlers.
menial	suitable for sevants; low	I cannot understand why a person of your ability and talent should engage in such menial activities.
mentor	counselor; teacher	During this very trying period, she could not have had a better mentor, for the teacher was sympathetic and understanding.
mercantile	concerning trade	I am more interested in the opportunites available in the mercantile field than I am in those in the legal profession.
mercenary	motivated solely by money or gain	"I'm not in this war because I get my kicks waving flags," said the mercenary soldier. "I'm in it for the dough".
mercurial	fickle; changing	He was of a mercurial temperament and therefore unpredictable.
meretricious	flashy; tawdry; falsely attractive	Her jewels were inexpensive but not meretricious.
merger	combination (of two business corporations)	When the firm's president married the director of financial planning, the office joke was that it wasn't a marriage, it was a merger.
mesmerize	hypnotize	The incessant drone seemed to mesmerize him and place him in a trance.
metallurgical	pertaining to the art of removing metals from ores	During the course of his metallurgical research, the scientist developed a steel alloy of tremendous strength.
metamorphosis	change of form	The metamorphosis of caterpillar to butterfly is typical of many such changes in animal life.
metaphor	implied comparison	"He soared like an eagle" is an example of a simile; "He is an eagle in flight," is a metaphor.
metaphysical	pertaining to speculative philosophy	The modern poets have gone back to the fanciful poems of the metaphysical poets of the seventeenth century for many of their images.
mete	measure; distribute	He tried to be impartial in his efforts to mete out justice.
meteoric	swift; momentarily brilliant	We all wondered at his meteoric rise to fame.
methodical	systematic	An accountant must be methodical and maintain order among his financial records.
meticulous	excessively careful	He was meticulous in checking his accounts and never made mistakes.
metropolis	large city	Every evening this terminal is filled with the thousands of commuters who are going from this metropolis to their homes in the suburbs.
mettle	courage; spirit	When challenged by the other horses in the race, the thoroughbred proved its mettle by its determination to hold the lead.
miasma	swamp gas; heavy, vaporous atmosphere, often emanating from decaying matter; pervasive	corrupting influence The smog hung over Victorian London like a dark cloud; noisome, reeking of decay, it was a visible miasma.
microcosm	small world	In the microcosm of our rural village, we find illustrations of all the evils that beset the universe.
migrant	changing its habitat; wandering	These migrant birds return every spring.
migratory	wandering	The return of the migratory birds to the northern sections of this country is a harbinger of spring.
milieu	environment; means of expression	His milieu is watercolors, although he has produced excellent oil paintings and lithographs.
militant	combative; bellicose	Althoughat this time he was advocating a policy of neutrality, one could usually find him adopting a more militant attitude.
militate	work against	Your record of lateness and absence will militate against your chances of promotion.
millenium	thousand-year period; period of happiness and prosperity	I do not expect the milennium to come during my lifetime.
millinery	person who makes or sells women's hats	The millinery displayed fashionable hats in the street where many women passed by.
mimicry	imitation	Her gift for mimicry was so great that her friends said that she should be in the theater.
minatory	menacing; threatening	Jabbing a minatory forefinger at Dorothy, the Wicked Witch cried, "I'll get you, and your little dog, too!"
mincing	affectedly dainty	Yum-Yum walked across the stage with mincing steps.
minion	a servile dependent	He was always accompanied by several of his minions because he enjoyed their subservience and flattery.
minuscule	extremely small	Why should I involve myself with a project with so minuscule a chance for success?
minute	extremely small	The twins resembled one another closely; only minute differences set them apart.
minutiae	petty details	She would have liked to ignore the minutiae of daily living.
mirage	unreal reflection; optical illusion	The lost prospector was fooled by a mirage in the desert.
mire	entangle; stick in swampy ground	Their rear wheels became mired in mud.
mirth	merriment; laughter	Sober Malvolio found Sir Toby's mirth improper.
misadventure	mischance; ill luck	The young explorer met death by misadventure.
misanthrope	one who hates mankind	We thought the hermit was a miantrope because he shunned our society.
misapprehension	error; misunderstanding	To avoid msapprehension, I am going to ask all of you to repeat the instructions I have given.
miscellany	mixture of writings on various subjects	This is an interesting miscellany of nineteenth-century prose and poetry.
mischance	ill luck	By mischance, he lost his week's salary.
misconstrue	interpret incorrectly; misjudge	She took the passage seriously rather than humourously because she misconstrued the author's ironic tone.
miscreant	wretch; villain	His kindness to the miscreant amazed all of us who had expected to hear severe punishment pronounced.
misdemeanor	minor crime	The culprit pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor rather than face trial for a felony.
miserly	stingy; mean	The miserly old man hoarded his coins not out of prudence but out of greed.
misgivings	doubts	Hamlet described his misgivings to Horatio but decided to fence with Laertes despite his foreboding of evil.
mishap	accident	With a little care you could have avoided this mishap.
misnomer	wrong name; incorrect designation	His tyrannical conduct proved to all that his nickname, King Eric the Just, was a misnomer.
misogamy	hatred of marriage	He remained a bachelor not because of misogamy but because of ill fate: his fiancee died before the wedding.
misogynist	hater of women	She accused him of being a misogynist because he had been a bachelor all his life.
missile	object to be thrown or projected	Scientists are experimenting with guided missiles.
missive	letter	The ambassador received a missive from the Secretary of State.
mite	very small object or creature; small coin	Gnats are annoying mites that sing.
mitigate	appease	Nothing he did could mitigate her wrath; she was unforgiving.
mnemonic	pertaining to memory	He used mnemonic tricks to master new words.
mobile	movable; not fixed	The mobile blood bank operated by the Red Cross visited our neighborhood today.
mode	prevailing style	She was not used to their lavish mode of living.
modicum	limited quantity	Although his story is based on a modicum of truth, most of the events he describes are fictitious.
modish	fashionable	She always discarded all garments that were no longer modish.
modulation	toning down; changing from one key to another	When we she spoke, it was with quiet modulation of voice.
mogul	powerful person	The oil moguls made great profits when the price of gasoline rose.
molecule	the smallest particle (one or more atoms) of a substance that has all the properties of that	substance In chemistry, we study how atoms and molcules react to form new substances.
mollify	soothe	We tried to mollify the hysterical child by promising her many gifts.
mollycoddle	pamper; indulge excessively	Don't mollycoddle the boy, Maud! You'll spoil him.
molt	shed or cast off hair or feathers	The male robin molted in the spring.
molten	melted	The city of Pompeii was destroyed by volcanic ash rather than by molten lava flowing from Mount Vesuvius.
momentous	very important	On this momentous occasion, we must be very solemn.
momentum	quantity of motion of a moving body; impetus	The car lost momentum as it tried to ascend the steep hill.
monarchy	government under a single hereditary ruler with varying degrees of power	England today remains a monarchy.
monastic	related to monks	Wanting to live a religious life, he took his monastic vows.
monetary	pertaining to money	Jane held the family purse strings: she made all monetary decisions affecting the household.
monochromatic	having only one color	Most people who are color blind actually can distinguish several colors; some, however, have a truly monochromatic view of a world all in shades of gray.
monolithic	solidly uniform; unyielding	Knowing the importance of appearing resolute, the patriots sought to present a monolithic front.
monotheism	belief in one God	Abraham was the first to proclaim his belief in monotheism.
monotony	sameness leading to boredom	He took a clerical job, but soon grew to hate the monotony of his daily routine.
monumental	massive	Writing a dictionary is a monumental task.
moodiness	fits of depression or gloom	We could not discover the cause of her recurrent moodiness.
moratorium	legal delay of payment	If we declare a moratorium and delay collection of debts for six months, I am sure the farmers will be able to meet their bills.
morbid	given to unwholesome thought; gloomy	These morbid speculations are dangerous; we must lighten our spirits by emphasizing more pleasant matters.
mordant	biting; sarcastic; stinging	Actors feared the critic's mordant pen.
mores	customs	The mores of Mexico are those of Spain with some modifications.
moribund	at the point of death	The doctors called the family to the bedside of the moribund patient.
morose	ill-humored; sullen	When we first meet Hamlet, we find him morose and depressed.
mortician	undertaker	The mortician prepared the corpse for burial.
mortify	humiliate; punish the flesh	She was so mortified by her blunder that she ran to her room in tears.
mosaic	picture made of smell, colorful inlaid tiles	The mayor compared the ciry to a beautiful mosaic made up of people of every race and religion on earth.
mote	small speck	The tiniest mote in the eye is very painful.
motif	theme	This simple motif runs throughout the score.
motility	ability to move spontaneously	Certain organisms exhibit remarkable motility; motile spores, for example, may travel for miles before coming to rest.
motley	parti-colored; mixed	The captain had gathered a motley crew to sail the vessel.
mottled	spotted	When he blushed, his face took on a mottled hue.
mountebank	charlatan; boastful pretender	The patent medicine man was a mountebank.
muddle	confuse; mix up	His thoughts were muddled and chaotic.
muggy	warm and damp	August in New York City is often muggy.
mulct	defraud a person of something	The lawyer was accused of trying to mulct the boy of his legacy.
multifarious	varied; greatly diversified	A career woman and mother, she was constantly busy with the multifarious activities of her daily life.
multiform	having many forms	Snowflakes are multiform but always hexagonal.
multilingual	having many languages	Because they are bordered by so many countries, the Swiss people are multilingual.
multiplicity	state of being numerous	He was appalled by the multuplicity of details he had to complete before setting out on his mission.
mundane	worldly as opposed to spiritual	He was concerned only with mundane matters, especially the daily stock market quotations.
munificent	very generous	The munificent gift was presented to the bride by her rich uncle.
murkiness	darkness; gloom	The murkiness and fog of the waterfront that evening depressed me.
muse	ponder	For a moment he mused about the beauty of the scene, but his thought soon changed as he recalled his own personal problems.
musky	having the odor of musk	She left a trace of musky perfume behind her.
muster	gather; assemble	Washington mustered his forces at Trenton.
musty	stale; spoiled by age	The attic was dark and musty.
mutable	changing in form; fickle	His opinion were mutable and easily influenced by anyone who had any powers of persuasion.
muted	silent; muffled; toned down	In the funeral parlor, the mourners' voices had a muted quality.
mutilate	maim	The torturer threatened to mutilate his victim.
mutinous	unruly; rebellious	The captain had to use force to quiet his mutinous crew.
mutter	murmur or grumble	The child muttered at the doll.
myopic	nearsighted	In thinking only of your present needs and ignoring the future, you are being rather myopic.
myriad	very large number	myriads of mosquitoes from the swamps invaded our village every twilight.
nadir	lowest point	Although few people realized it, the Dow-Jones averages had reached their nadir and would soon begin an upward surge.
naivete	quality of being unsophisticated	I cannot believe that such naivete is unassumed in a person of her age and experience.
narcissist	conceited person	A narcissist is his own best friend.
narrative	related to telling a story	A born teller of tales, Olsen used her impressive narrative skills to advantage in her story "I Stand Here Ironing".
nascent	incipient; coming into being	If we could identify these revolutionary movements in their nascent state, we would be able to eliminate serious trouble in later years.
natation	swimming	The Red Cross emphasizes the need for courses in natation.
natty	neatly or smartly dresssed	Priding himself on being a natty dresser, the gangster Bugsy Siegel collected a wardrobe of imported suits and ties.
nauseate	cause to become sick; fill with disgust	The foul smells began to nauseate him.
nautical	pertaining to ships or navigation	The Maritime Museum contains many models of clipper ships, logbooks, anchors and many other items of a nautical nature.
nebulous	vague; hazy; cloudy	She had only a nebulous memory of her grandmother's face.
necromancy	black magic; dealings with the dead	Because he was able to perform feats of necromancy, the natives thought he was in league with the devil.
nefarious	very wicked	He was universally feared because of his many nefarious deeds.
negation	denial	I must accept his argument since you have been unable to present any negation of his evidence.
negligence	carelessness	negligence can prove costly near complicated machinery.
negligible	so small, trifling, or unimportant as to be easily disregarded	Because the damage to his car had been negligible, Michael decided he wouldn't bother to report the matter to his insurance company.
nemesis	revenging agent	Captain Bligh vowed to be Christian's nemesis.
neologism	new or newly coined word or phrase	As we invent new techniques and professions, we must also invent neologisms such as "microcomputer" and "astronaut" to describe them.
neophyte	recent convert; beginner	This monuntain slope contains slides that will challenge esperts as well as neophytes.
nepotism	favoritism (to a relative)	John left his position with the company because he felt that advancement was based on nepotism rather than ability.
nether	lower	Tradition locates hell in the nether regions.
nettle	annoy; vex	Do not let him nettle you with his sarcastic remarks.
nexus	connection	I fail to see the nexus that binds these two widely separated events.
nib	beak; pen point	The nibs of fountain pens often become clotted and corroded.
nicety	precision; minute distinction	I cannot distinguish between such niceties of reasoning.
niggardly	meanly stingy; parsimonious	The niggardly pittance the widow receives from the government cannot keep her from poverty.
niggle	spend too much time on minor points; carp	Let's not niggle over details.
nihilism	denial of traditional values; total skepticism	nihilism holds that existence has no meaning.
nirvana	Buddihist teachings, the ideal state in which the individual loses himself in the attainment of an	impersonal beatitude Despite his desire to achieve nirvana, the young Buddhist found that even the buzzing of a fly could distract him from his meditation.
nocturnal	done at night	Mr. Jones obtained a watchdog to prevent the nocturnal raids on his chicken coops.
noisome	foul smelling; unwholesome	I never could stand the noisome atmosphere surrounding the slaughter houses.
nomadic	wandering	Several nomadic tribes of Indians would hunt in this area each year.
nomenclature	terminology; system of names	She struggled to master scientific nomenclature.
nominal	in name only; trifling	He offered to drive her to the airport for only a nominal fee.
nonchalance	indifference; lack of interest	Few people could understand how he could listen to the news of the tragedy with such nonchalance; the mahority regarded him as callous and unsympathetic.
noncommittal	neutral; unpledged; undecided	We were annoyed by his noncommittal reply for we had been led to expect definite assurances of his approval.
nondescript	undistinctive; ordinary	The private detective was a short, nondescript fellow with no ourstanding features, the sort of person one would never notice in a crowd.
nonentity	person of no importance; nonexistence	Don't dismiss John as a nonentity; in his quiet way, he's very important to the firm.
nonplus	bring to a halt by confusion; perplex	Jack's uncharacteristic rudeness nonplussed Jill, leaving her uncertain how to react.
nostalgia	homesickness; longing for the past	The first settlers found so much work to do that they had little time for nostalgia.
nostrum	questionable medicine	No quack selling nostrums is going to cheat me.
notoriety	disrepute; ill fame	To the starlet, any publicity was good publicity: if she couldn't have a good reputation, she'd settle for notoriety.
novelty	something new; newness	The computer is no longer a novelty around the office.
novice	beginner	Even a novice can do good work if he follows these simple directions.
noxious	harmful	We must trace the source of these noxious gases before they asphyxiate us.
nuance	shade of difference in meaning or color	The unskilled eye of the layperson has difficulty in dicerning the nuances of color in the paintings.
nubile	marrigeable	Mrs. Bennet, in Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen, was worried about finding suitable husbands for her five nubile daughters.
nugatory	futile; worthless	This agreement is nugatory for no court will enforce it.
nullify	to make invalid	Once the contract was nullified, it no longer had any legal force.
numismatist	person who collects coins	The numismatist had a splendid collection of antique coins.
nuptial	related to marriage	Their nuptial ceremony was performed in Golden Gate Park.
nurture	nourish; educate; foster	The head Start program attempts to nurture prekindergarten children so that they will do well when they enter public school.
nutrient	nourishing substance	As a budding nutritionist, Kim has learned to design diets that contain foods rich in important basic nutrients.
oaf	stupid, awkward person	He called the unfortunate waiter a clumsy oaf.
obdurate	stubborn	He was obdurate in his refusal to listen to our complaints.
obeisance	bow	She made an obeisance as the king and queen entered the room.
obelisk	tall column tapering and ending in a pyramid	Cleopatra's Needle is an obelisk in New York City's Central Park.
obese	excessively fat	It is advisable that obese people try to lose weight.
obfuscate	confuse; muddle	Do not obfuscate the issues by dragging in irrelevant arguments.
obituary	dealth notice	I first learned of her death when I read the obituary in the newspaper.
objective	goal; aim	A degree in medicine was her ultimate objective.
objective	not influenced by emotions; fair	Even though he was her son, she tried to be objective about his behavior.
obligatory	binding; required	It is obligatory that books borrowed from the library be returned within two weeks.
oblique	slanting; deviating from the perpendicular or from a straight line	The sergeant ordered the men to march "oblique right".
obliterate	destroy completely	The tidal wave obliterated several island villages.
oblivion	forgetfulness	Her work had fallen into a state of oblivion; no one bothered to read them.
obloquy	slander; disgrace; infamy	I resent the obloquy that you are casting upon my reputation.
obnoxious	offensive	I find your behavior obnoxious; please mend your ways.
obscure	dark; vague; unclear	Even after I read the poem a fourth time, its meaning was still obscure.
obscure	darken; make unclear	At times he seemed purposely to obscure his meaning, preferring mystery to clarity.
obsequious	slavishly attentive; servile; sycophantic	Helen valued people who behaved as if they respected themselves; nothing irritated her more than an excessively obsequious waiter or a fawning salesclerk.
obsequy	funeral ceremony	Hundreads paid their last respects at his obsequies.
obsession	fixed idea; continued brooding	This obsession with the supernatural has made him unpopular with his neighbors.
obsidian	clak volcanic rock	The deposits of obsidian on the mountain slopes were an indiacation that volcano had erupted in ancient times.
obsolete	outmoded	"Hip" is an obsolete expression; it went out with love beads and tie-dye shirts.
obstetrician	physician specializing in delivery of babies	Unlike midwives, who care for women giving birth at home, obstetricians generally work in a hospital setting.
obstinate	stubborn	We tried to persuade him to give up smoking, but he was obstinate and refused to change.
obstreperous	boisterous; noisy	The crowd became obstreperous and shouted their disapproval of the proposals made by the speaker.
obtrusive	pushing forward	I found her a very obstrusive person, constantly seeking the center of the stage.
obtuse	blunt; stupid	Because he was so obtuse, he could not follow the teacher's reasoning and asked foolish questions.
obviate	make unnecessary; get rid of	I hope this contribution will obviate any need for further collections of funds.
occident	the West	It will take occident to understand the ways and customs of the orient.
occlude	shut; close	A blood clot occluded an artery to the heart.
occult	mysterious; secret; supernatural	The occult rites of the organization were revealed only to members.
oculist	physician who specialized in treatment of the eyes	In many states, an oculist is the only one who may apply medicinal drops to the eyes for the purpose of examining them.
odious	hateful	I find the task of punishing you most odious.
odium	repugnance; dislike	I cannot express the odium I feel at your heinous actions.
odoriferous	giving off an odor	The odoriferous spices stimulated her jaded appetite.
odorous	having an odor	This variety of hybrid tea rose is more odorous than the one you have in your garden.
odyssey	long, evenful journey	The refugee's journey from Cambodia was a terrifying odyssey.
offensive	attacking; insulting; distasteful	Getting into street brawls is no minor offense for professional boxers, who are required by law to restrict their offensive impulses to the ring.
offhand	casual; done without prior thought	Expecting to be treated with due propriety by her costs, Great-Aunt Maud was offended by their offhand manner.
officious	meddlesome; excessively pushy in offering one's services	After her long flight, Jill just wanted to nap, but the officious bellboy was intent on showing her all the special features of the deluxe suite.
ogle	glance coquettishly at; make eyes at	Sitting for hours at the sidewalk cafe, the old gentleman would oggle the young girls and recall his youthful romances.
olfactory	concerning the sense of smell	The olfactory organ is the nose.
oligarchy	government by a few	The feudal oligarchy was supplanted by an autocracy.
ominous	threatening	Those clouds are ominous; they suggest that a severe storm is on the way.
omnipotent	all-powerful	The monarch regarded himself as omnipotent and responsible to no one for his acts.
omnipresent	universally present; ubiquitous	On Christmas Eve, Santa Claus is omnipotent.
omniscient	all-knowing	I do not pretend to be omniscient, but I am positive about this fact.
omnivorous	eating both plant and animal food; devouring everything	Some animals, including humans, are omnivorous and eat both meat and vegetables; others are either carnivorous or herbivorous.
onerous	burdensome	He asked for an assistant because his work load was too onerous.
onomatopoeia	words formed in imitation of natural sounds	Words like "rustle" and "gargle" are illustrations of onomatopoeia.
onslaught	vicious assault	We suffered many casualties during unexpected onslaght of the enemy troops.
onus	burden; responsibility	The emperor was spared the onus of signing the surrender papers; instead, he relegated the assignment to his generals.
opalescent	iridescent	The Ancient Mariner admired the opalescent sheen on the water.
opaque	dark; not transparent	The opaque window kept the sunlight out of the room.
opiate	sleep producer; deadener of pain	By such opiates, she made the people forget their difficulties and accept their unpleasant circumstances.
opportune	timely; well chosen	You have come at an opportune moment for I need a new secretary.
opportunist	individual who sacrifices principles for expediency by taking advantage of circumstances	Forget about ethics! He's such an opportunist that he'll vote in favor of any deal that will give him a break.
opprobrium	infamy; vilification	He refused to defend himself against the slander and opprobrium hurled against him by the newspapers; he preferred to rely on his record.
optician	maker and seller of eyeglasses	The patient took the prescription given him by his oculist to the optician.
optimist	person who looks on the bright side	The pessimist says the glass is half-empty; the optimist says it is half-full.
optimum	most favorable	If you wait for the optimum moment to act, you may never begin your project .
optional	not compulsory; left to one's choice	I was impressed by the range of optional accessories for my microcomputer that were available.
optometrist	one who fits glasses to remedy visual defects	Although an optometrist is qualified to treat many eye disorders, she may not use medicinesor surgery in her examinations.
opulence	extreme wealth; luxuriousness; abundance	The glitter and opulence of the ballroom took Cinderella's breath away.
opus	work	Although many critics hailed his Fifth Symphony, he did not regard it as his major opus.
oracular	foretelling; mysterious	Oedipus could not understand the oracular warning he received.
oratorio	dramatic poem set to music	The Glee Club decided to present an oratorio during their recital.
ordain	command; arrange; consecrate	The king ordained that no foreigner should be allowed to enter the city.
ordeal	severe trial or affliction	Terry Anderson spoke movingly of his long ordeal as a hostage in Lebanon.
ordinance	decree	Passing a red light is a violation of a city ordinance.
ordination	ceremony conferring holy orders	The candidate for ordination had to meet with the bishop and the diocean officers before being judged ready to be ordained a deacon.
orient	get one's bearings; adjust	Philip spent his first day in Denver orienting himself to the city.
orientation	act of finding oneself in society	Freshman orientation provides the incoming students with an opportunity to learn about their new environment and their place in it.
orifice	mouthlike opening; small opening	The Howe Caverns were discovered when someone observed that a cold wind was issuing from an orifice in the hillside.
ornate	excessively or elaborately decorated	Furniture of the Baroque period can be recognized by its ornate carvings.
ornithologist	scientific student of birds	Auduborn's drawings of American bird life have been of interest not only to the ornithologists but also to the general public.
orthodox	traditional; conservative in belief	Faced with a problem, he preferred to take an orthodox approach rather than shock anyone.
orthography	correct spelling	Many of us find English orthography difficult to master because so many of our words are written phonetically.
oscillate	vibrate pendulumlike; waver	It is interesting to note how public opinion oscillates between the extremes of optimism and pessimism.
osseus	made of bone; bony	The hollow "soft spot" found at the top of the infant's skull gradually closes as new osseus tissue fills in the gap.
ossify	change or harden into bone	When he called his opponent a "bonehead," he implied that his adversary's brain had ossified and that he was not capable of clear thinking.
ostensible	apparent; professed; pretended	Although the ostensible purpose of this expedition is to discover new lands, we are really interested in finding new markets for our products.
ostentatious	showy; pretentious; trying to attract attention	Trump's latest casino in Atlantic City is the most ostentatious gambling place in the East: it easily outglitters its competitors.
ostracize	exclude from public favor; ban	As soon as the newspapers carried the story of his connection with the criminals, his friends began to ostracize him.
oust	expel; drive out	The world wondered if Aquino would be able to oust Marcos from office.
outlandish	bizzare; peculiar; unconventional	The eccentric professor who engages in markedly outlandish behavior is a stock figure in novels with an academic setting.
outmoded	no longer stylish; old-fahioned	Unconcerned about keeping in style, Lenore was perfectly happy to wear outmoded clothes as long as they were clean and unfrayed.
outrtip	surpass; outdo	Jesse Owens easily outstripped his competitors to win the gold metal at the Olympic Games.
outskirts	fringes; outer borders	Living outskirts of Boston, Sarah sometimes felt as if she were cut off from the cultural heart of the city.
outspoken	candid; blunt	The candidate was too outspoken to be a successful politician; he had not yet learned to weigh his words carefully.
outwit	outsmart; trick	By disguising himself as an old woman, Holmes was able to outwit his pursuers and escape capture.
ovation	enthusiastic applause	When Placido Domingo came on stage in the first act of La Boheme, he was greeted by a tremendous ovation.
overbearing	bossy; arrogant; decisively important Certain of her own importance and of the unimportance of everyone else, Lady Bracknell was intolerably	overbearing in manner. "In choosing a husband," she said, "good birth is of overbearing importance; compared to that, neither wealth nor talent signifie
overhaul	thoroughly examine the condition of and repair if necessary	It is necessary for the engineers of NASA to overhaul the rocket everyday; otherwise, an incident similar to that of Challenger accident might happen.
overt	open to view	According to the United States Constitution, a person must commit an overt act before he may be tried for treason.
overweening	presumptuous; arrogant	His overweening pride in his accomplishments was not justified.
overwrought	extremely agitated; hysterical	When Kate heard the news of the sudden tragedy, she became too overwrought to work and had to leave the office early.
ovoid	egg-shaped	At Easter she had to cut out hundreds of brightly colored ovoid shapes.
pachyderm	thick-skinned animal	The elephant is probably the best-known pachyderm.
pacifist	one opposed to force; antimilitarist	The pacifists urged that we reduce our military budget and recall our troops stationed overseas.
pacify	soothe; make calm or quiet; subdue	Dentists criticize the practice of giving fussy children sweets to pacify them.
paean	song of praise or joy	paeans celebrating the victory filled the air.
painstaking	showing hard work; taking great care	The new high-frequency word list is the result of painstaking efforts on the part of our research staff.
palatable	agreeable; pleasing to the taste	Neither Jack's underbaked opinions nor his overcooked casseroles were palatable to me.
palatial	magnificent	He proudly showed us through his palatial home.
paleontology	study of prehistoric life	The professor of paleontology had a superb collection of fossils.
palette	board on which a painter mixes pigments	At the present time, art supply stores are selling a paper palette that may be discarded after use.
palimpsest	parchment used for second time after original writing has been erased	Using chemical reagents, scientists have been able to restore the original writings on many palimpsests.
pall	grow tiresome	The study of word lists can eventually pall and put one to sleep.
pallet	small, poor bed	The weary traveler went to sleep on his straw pallet.
palliate	ease pain; make less severe or offensive	If we cannot cure this disease at present, we can, at least try to palliate the symptoms.
pallid	pale; wan	Because his occupation required that he work at night and sleep during the day, he had an exceptionally pallid complexion.
palpable	tangible; easily perceptible	I cannot understand how you could overlook such a palpable blunder.
palpitate	throb; flutter	As he became excited, his heart began to palpitate more and more erratically.
paltry	insignificant; petty	This is a paltry sum to pay for such a masterpiece.
pan	criticize harshly	Hoping for a rave review of his new show, the playwright was miserable when the critics panned it unanimously.
panacea	cure-all; remedy for all diseases	There is no easy panacea that will solve our complicated international situation.
panache	flair; flamboyance	Many performers imitate Noel Coward, but few have his panache and sense of style.
pandemic	widespread; affecting the majority of people	They feared the AIDS epidemic would soon reach pandemic proportions.
pandemonium	wild tumult	When the ships collided in the harbor, pandemonium broke out among the passengers.
pander	cater to the low desires of others	The reviewer accused the makers of Lethal Weapon of pandering to the masses' taste of violence.
panegyric	formal praise	The modest hero blushed to hear the speakers delivering panegyrics about his valorous act.
panoramic	denoting an unobstructed and comprehensive view	On a clear day, from the top of the World Trade Center you can get a panoramic view of New York City and neighboring stretches of New Jersey and Long Island.
pantomime	acting without dialogue	Because he worked in pantomime, the clown could be understood wherever he appeared.
papyrus	ancient paper made from stem of papyrus plant	The ancient Egyptians were among the first to write on papyrus.
parable	short, simple story teaching a moral	Let us apply to our own conduct the lesson that this parable teaches.
paradigm	model; example; pattern	Pavlov's experiment in which he trains a dog to salivate on hearing a bell is a paradigm of the conditioned- response experiment in behavioal psychology.
paradox	statement that looks false but is actually correct; a contradictory statement	Wordworth's "The child is father to the man" is an example of paradox.
paragon	model of perfection	The class disliked him because the teacher was always pointing him out as a paragon of virtue.
parallelism	state of being parallel; similarity	There is a striking parallelism between the twins.
parameter	limit; independent variable	We need to define the parameters of the problem.
paramount	foremost in importance; supreme	Proper nutrition and hygiene are of paramount importance in adolescent development and growth.
paramour	illicit lover	She sought a divorce on the grounds that her husband had a paramour in another town.
paranoia	psychosis marked by delusions of grandeur or persecution	Suffering from paranois, he claimed everyone was out to get him; ironically, his claim was accurate; even paranoids have enemies.
paraphernalia	equipment; odds and ends	His desk was cluttered with paper, pen, ink, dictionary and other paraphernalia of the writing craft.
paraphrase	restate a passage in one's own words while retaining thought of author	In 250 words or less, paraphrase this article.
parasite	animal or plant living on another; toady; sycophant	The tapeworm is an example of the kind of parasite that may infest the human body.
parched	extremely dry; very thirsty	The parched desert landscape seemed hostile to life.
pariah	social outcast	I am not a pariah to be shunned and ostracized.
parity	equality; close resemblance	I find your analogy inaccurate because I do not see the parity between the two illustrations.
parlance	language; idiom	All this legal parlance confuses me; I need an interpreter.
parley	conference	The peace parley has not produced the anticipated truce.
parochial	narrow in outlook; provincial; related to parishes	Although Jane Austen writes novels set in small rural communities, her concerns are universal, not parochial.
parody	humorous imitation; travesty	We enjoyed the clever parodies of popular songs that the chorus sang.
paroxysm	fit or attack of pain, laughter, rage	When he heared of his son's misdeeds, he was seized by a paroxysm of rage.
parquet	floor made of wood strips inlaid in a mosic-like pattern	In laying the floor, the carpenters combined redwood and oak in an elegant parquet.
parry	ward off a blow	He was content to wage a defensive battle and tried to parry his opponent's thrusts.
parsimonious	stingy; excessively frugal	His parsimonious nature did not permit him to enjoy any luxuries.
partial	biased; having a liking for something	I am extremely partial to chocolate eclairs.
partial	incomplete	In this issue we have published only a partial list of contributors because we lack space to acknowledge everyone.
partiality	inclination; bias	As a judge, not only must I be unbiased, but I must also avoid any evidence of partiality when I award the prize.
partisan	one-sided; prejudiced; committed to a party	On certain issues of conscience, she refused to take a partisan stand.
passe	old-fashioned; past the prime	Her style is passe and reminiscent of the Victorian era.
passive	not active; acted upon	Mahatma Gandhi urged his followers to pursue a program of passive resistance as he felt that it was more effective than violence and acts of terrorism.
pastiche	imitation of another's style in musical composition or in writing	We cannot even say that her music is a pastiche of this or that composer; it is rather, reminiscent of many musicians.
pastoral	rural	In these stories of pastoral life, we find an understanding of the daily tasks of country folk.
patent	open for the public to read; obvious	It was patent to everyone that the witness spoke the truth.
pathetic	causing sadness, compassion, pity; touching	Everyone in the auditorium was weeping by the time he finished his pathetic tale about the orphaned boy.
pathological	pertaining to disease	As we study the pathological aspects of this disease, we must not overlook the psychological elements.
pathos	tender to sorrow; pity; quality in art or literature that produces these feelings	The quiet tone of pathos that ran through the novel never degenerated into the maudlin or the overly sentimental.
patina	green crust on old bronze works; tone slowly taken by varnished painting	Judging by the patina on this bronze statue, we can conclude that this is the work of a medieval artist.
patois	local or provincial dialect	His years of study of the language at the university did not enable him to understand the patois of the natives.
patriarch	father and ruler of a family or tribe	In many primitive tribes, the leader and lawmaker was the patriarch.
patrician	noble; aristocratic	We greatly admired her well-bred, patrician elegance
patronize	support; act superior toward	Experts in a field sometimes appear to patronize people who are less knowledgeable of the subject.
paucity	scarcity	They closed the restaurant because the paucity of customers made it uneconomical to operate.
pauper	very poor person	Though Widow Brown was living on a reduced income, she was by no means a pauper.
peccadillo	slight offense	If we examine these escapades carefully, we will realize that they are mere peccadilloes rather than major crimes.
pecuniary	pertaining to money	I never expected a pecuniary reward for my work in this activity.
pedagogue	teacher	He could never be a stuffy pedagogue; his classes were always lively and filled with humor.
pedagogy	teaching; art of education	Though Maria Montessori gained fame for her innovations in pedagogy, it took years before her teaching techniques became common practice in American schools.
pedant	scholar who overemphasizes book learning or technicalities	Her insistence that the book be memorized marked the teacher as a pedant rather than a scholar.
pedantic	showing off learning; bookish	Leaving his decisions with humorous, down-to-earth anecdotes, Judge Walker was not at all pedantic legal scholar.
pedestrian	ordinary; unimaginative	Unintentionally boring, he wrote page after page of pedestrian prose.
pediatrician	physician specializing in children's diseases	The family doctor advised the parents to consult a pediatrician about their child's ailment.
pejorative	negative in connotation; having a belittling effect	Instead of criticizing Clinton's policies, the Republicans made pejorative remarks about his character.
pellmell	in confusion; disorderly	The excited students dashed pellmell into the stadium to celebrate the victory.
pellucid	transparent; limpid; easy to understand	After reading these stodgy philosophers, I find his pellucid style very enjoyable.
penance	self-imposed punishment for sin	The Ancient Mariner said, "I have penance done and penance more will do," to atone for the sin of killing the albatross.
penchant	strong inclination; liking	He had a strong penchant for sculpture and owned many statues.
pendant	hanging down from something	Her pendant earrings glistened in the light.
pendant	ornament (hanging from a necklace, etc.)	The grateful team presented the coach with a silver chain and pendant engraved with the school's motto.
pendulous	hanging; suspended	The pendulous chandeliers swayed in the breeze as if they were about to fall from the ceiling.
penitent	repentant	When he realized the enormity of his crime, he became remorseful and penitent.
pensive	dreamily thoughtful; thoughtful with a hint of sadness	The pensive youth gazed at the painting for a long time and then sighed.
penumbra	partial shadow (in an eclipse)	During an eclipse, we can see an area of total darkness and a lighter area, which is the penumbra.
penurious	stingy; parsimonious	He was a penurious man, averse to spending money even for the necessities of life.
penury	extreme poverty	When his pension fund failed, George feared he would end his days in penury.
peon	landless agricultural worker; bond servant	The land reformers sought to liberate the peons and establish them as independent farmers.
perceptive	insightful; aware; wise	Although Maud was a generally perceptive critic, she had her blind sports: she could never see flaws in the work of her friends.
percussion	striking one object against another sharply	The drum is a percussion instrument.
perdition	damnation; complete ruin	Praying for salvation, young Daedalus feared he was damned to eternal perdition.
peregrination	journey	Auntie Mame was a world traveler whose peregrinations took her from Tiajuana to Timbuctoo.
peremptory	demanding and leaving no choice	From Jack's peremptory knock on the door, Jill could tell he would not give up until she let him in.
perennial	something long-lasting	Tese plants are hardy perennials and will bloom for many years.
perforate	pierce; put a hole through	Before you can open the aspirin bottle, you must first perforate the plastic safety seal that covers the cap.
perfunctory	superficial; not thorough; lacking interest, care, or enthusiasm	The auditor's perfunctory inspection of the books overlooked many errors.
perifidious	treacherous; disloyal	When Caesar realized that Brutus had betrayed him, he reproached his perfidious friend.
perigee	point of moon's orbit when it is nearest the earth	The rocket which was designed to take photographs of the moon was launched as the moon approached its perigee.
perimeter	outer boundary	To find the perimeter of any quadrilateral, we add the lengths of the four sides.
peripatetic	walking about; moving	The peripatetic school of philosophy derives its name from the fact that Aristotle walked with his pupils while discussing philosophy with them.
peripheral	marginal; outer	We lived, not in central London, but in one of those peripheral suburbs that spring up on the outskirts of the great city.
periphery	edge, especially of a round surface	He sensed that there was something just beyond the periphery of his vision.
perjury	false testimony while under oath	When several witnesses appeared to challenge his story, he was indicted for perjury.
permeable	porous; allowing passage through	Glass is permeable to light.
pernicious	very destructive, harmful	He argued that these books had a pernicious effect on young and susceptible minds.
peroration	conclusion of an oration	The peroration was largely hortatory and brought the audience to its feet clamoring for action at its close.
perpetrate	commit an offense	Only an insane person could perpetrate such a horrible crime.
perpetual	everlasting	Ponce de Leon hoped to find perpetual youth.
perquisite	any gain above stipulated salary	The perquisites attached to this job make it even more attractive than the salary indicates.
personable	attractive	The man I am seeking to fill this position must be personable since he will be representing us before the public.
perspicacious	having insight; penetrating; astute	The brillant lawyer was known for his perspicacious deductions.
perspicuity	clearness of expression; freedom from ambiguity	One of the outstanding features of this book is the perspicuity of its author; her meaning is always clear.
perspicuous	plainly expressed	Her perspicuous comments eliminated all posibility of misinterpretation.
pert	impertinent; forward	I think your pert and impudent remarks call for an apology.
pertinacious	stubborn; persistent	He is bound to succeed because his pertinacious nature will not permit him to quit.
pertinent	suitable; to the point	The lawyer wanted to know all the pertinent details.
perturb	disturb greatly	I am afraid this news will perturb him and cause him grief.
perusal	reading	I am certain that you have missed important details in your rapid perusal of this document.
pervasive	spread throughout	Despite airing them for several hours, she could not rid her clothes of the pervasive odor of mothbals that clung to them.
perverse	stubbornly wrongheaded; wicked and unacceptable	When Hannibal Lecter was in a perverse mood, he ate the flesh of his victims.
perversion	corruption; turning from right to wrong	Inasmuch as he had no motive for his crimes, we could not understand his perversion.
pessimism	belief that life is basically bad or evil; gloominess	The good news we have been receiving lately indicates that there is little reason for your pessimism.
pest	troublesome or annoying person	He was a pest; always bothering people.
pestilential	causing plague; baneful	People were afraid to explore the pestilential swap.
pestle	tool for mashing or grinding substances in a hard bowl	From the way in which the elderly pharmacist pounded the drug with his pestle, young George could tell that his employer was agitated about something.
petrify	turn to stone	His sudden and unexpected appearance seemed to petrify her.
petty	trivial; unimportant; very small	She had no major complaints to make about his work, only a few petty quibbles that were almost too minor to state.
petulant	touchy; peevish	The feverish patient was petulant and restless.
pharisaical	pertaining to Pharisees, who paid scrupulous attention to tradition; self-righteous;	hypocritical Walter Lippmann has pointed out that moralists who do not attempt to explain the moral code they advocate are often regarded as pharisaical and ignored.
phenomena	observable facts; subjects of scientific investigation	We kept careful records of the phenomena we noted in the course of these experiments.
philanderer	faithless lover; flirt	Swearing he had never so much as looked at another woman, Jack assured Jill he was no philanderer.
philanthropist	lover of mankind; doer of good	As he grew older, he became famous as a philanthropist and benefactor of the needy.
philatelist	stamp-collector	When she heard the value of the Penny Black stamp, Phyllis was inspired to become a philatelist.
philistine	narrow-minded person, uncultured and exculsively interested in material gain	We need more men of culture and enlightenment; we have too many philistines among us.
philology	study of language	The professor of philology advocated the use of Esperanto as an international language.
phlegmatic	calm; not easily disturbed	The nurse was a cheerful but phlegmatic person, unexcited in the face of sudden emergencies.
phobia	morbid fear	Her fear of flying was more than mere nervousness; it was a real phobia.
physiognomy	face	He prided himself on his ability to analyze a person's character by studying his physiognomy.
physiological	pertaining to the science of the function of living organisms	To understand this disease fully, we must examine not only its physiological aspects but also its psychological elements.
piebald	of different colors; motled; spotted	You should be able to identify Polka Dot in this race; he is the only piebald horse running.
pied	variegated; multicolored	The pied piper of Hamelin got his name from the multicolored clothing he wore.
piety	devoutness; reverence for God	Living her life in prayer and good works, Mother Teresa exemplifies the true sprit of piety.
pigment	coloring matter	Van Gogh mixed various pigments with linseed oil to create his paints.
pillage	plunder	The enemy pillaged the quiet village and left it in ruins.
pillory	punish by placing in a wooden frame; subject to criticism and ridicule	Even though he was mocked and pilloried, he maintained that he was correct in his beliefs.
pine	languish, decline; long for, yearn	Though she tried to be happy living with Clara in the city, Heidi pined for the mountains and for her gruff but loving grandfather.
pinion	restrain	They pinioned his arms against his body but left his legs free so that he could move about.
pinnacle	peak	We could see the morning sunlight illuminate the pinnacle while the rest of the mountain lay in shadow.
pious	devout	The pious parents gave their children a religious upbringing.
piquant	pleasantly tart-tasting; stimulating	The piquant sauce added to our enjoyment of the meal.
pique	irritation; resentment	She showed her pique by her refusal to appear with the other contestants at the end of the contest.
piscatorial	pertaining to fishing	He spent many happy hours at the lake in his piscatorial activities.
pithy	concise; meaty	I enjoy reading his essays because they are always compact and pithy.
pittance	a small allowance or wage	He could not live on the pittance he received as a pension and had to look for an additional source of revenue.
pivotal	central; critical	De Klerk's decision to set Nelson Mandela free was pivotal; without Mandela's release, there was no possibility that the African National Cogress would entertain talks with the South African government.
placate	pacify; conciliate	The teacher tried to placate the angry mother.
placebo	harmless substance prescribed as a dummy pill	In a controlled experiment, fifty volunteers were given erythromycin tablets; the control group received only placebos.
placid	peaceful; calm	After his vacation in this placid section, he felt soothed and rested.
plagiarize	steal another's ideas and pass them off as one's own The editor could tell that the writer had plagiarized parts of the article; he could recognize whole	paragraphs from the original source.
plaintive	mournful	The dove has a plaintive and melancholy call
plasticity	ability to be molded	When clay dries out, it loses its plasticity and becomes less malleable.
platitude	trite remark; commonplace statement	The platitudes in his speech were applauded by the vast majority in his audience; only a few people perceived how trite his remarks were.
platonic	purely spiritual; theoretical; without sensual desire	Accused of impropriety in his dealings with female students, the professor maintained he had only a platonic interest in the women involved.
plauditory	approving; applauding	The theatrical company reprinted the plauditory comments of the critics in its advertisement.
plausible	having a show of truth but open to doubt; specious	Even though your argument is plausible, I still would like to have more proof.
plebeian	common; pertaining to the common people	His speeches were aimed at the plebeian minds and emotions; they disgusted the more refined.
plenary	complete; full	The union leader was given plenary power to negotiate a new contract with the employers.
plenitude	abundance; completeness	Looking in the pantry, we admired the plenitude of fruits and pickles we had preserved during the summer.
plethora	excess; overabundance	She offered a plethora of excuses for her shortcomings.
pliable	flexible; yielding; adaptable	In remodeling the bathroom, we replaced all the old, rigid lead pipes with new, pliable copper tubing.
pliant	flexible; easily influenced	Catherine's disposition was pliant; she was like putty in her suitor's hands.
pluck	courage	Even the adversaries of young Indiana Jones were impressed by the boy's pluck in trying to rescue the archeological treasure they had stolen.
plumb	vertical	Before hanging wallpaper it is advisable to drop a plumb line from the ceiling as a guide.
plummet	fall sharply	Stock prices plummeted as Wall Street reacted to the rise in interest rates.
plutocracy	society ruled by the wealthy	From the way the government caters to the rich, you might think our society is a plutocracy rather than a democracy.
podiatrist	doctor who treats ailments of the feet	He consulted a podiatrist about his fallen arches.
podium	pedestal; raised platform	The audience applauded as the conductor made his way to the podium.
poignancy	quality of being deeply moving; keenness of emotion	Watching the tearful reunion of the long-separated mother and child, the social worker was touched by the poignancy of the scene.
polarize	split into opposite extremes or camps	The abortion issue has polarized the country into pro-choice and anti-abortion camps.
polemic	controversy; argument in support of point of view	Her essays were, for the main part, polemics for the party's policy.
politic	expedient; prudent; well devised	Even though he was disappointed, he did not think it politic to refuse the offer.
polity	form of government of nation or state	Our polity should be devoted to the concept that the government should strive for the good of all citizens.
polygamist	one who has more than one spouse at a time	He was arrested as a polygamist when his two wives filed complaints about him.
polyglot	speaking several languages	New York City is a polyglot community because of the thousands of immigrants who settle there.
pomposity	self-important behavior; acting like a stuffed shirt	Although the commencement speaker had some good things to say, we had to laugh at his pomposity and general air of parading his own dignity.
ponderous	weighty; unwieldy	His humor lacked the light touch; his jokes were always ponderous.
pontifical	pertaining to a bishop or pope; pompous or pretentious	From the very beginning of his ministry it was clear from his pontifical pronouncements that John was destined for a high pontifical office.
pore	study industriously; ponder; scrutinize	Determined to become a physician, Beth spends hours poring over her anatomy text.
porous	full of pores; like a sieve	Dancers like to wear porous clothing because it allows the ready passage of water and air.
portend	foretell; presage	The king did not know what these omens might portend and asked his soothsayers to interpret them.
portent	sign; omen; forewarning	He regarded the black cloud as a portent of evil.
portly	stout; corpulent	The salesclerk tactfully referred to the overweight customer as portly rather than fat.
poseur	person who pretends to be sophisticated, elegant, etc., to impress others	Some thought Dali was a brillant painter; others dismissed him as a poseur.
posterity	descendants; future generations	We hope to leave a better world to posterity.
posthumous	after death (as of child born after father's death or book published after author's death)	The critics ignored his works during his lifetime; it was only after the posthumous publication of his last novel that they recognized his great talent.
postulate	self-evident truth	We must accept these statements as postulates before pursuing our discussions any further.
posture	assume an affected pose; act artificially	No matter how much Arnold boasted or postured, I could not believe he was as important as he pretended to be.
potable	suitable for drinking	The recent drought in the Middle Atlantic States has emphasized the need for extensive research in ways of making sea water potable.
potent	powerful; persuasive; greatly influential	The jury was swayed by the highly potent testimony of the crime's sole eyewitness.
potentate	monarch; sovereign	The potentate spent more time at Monte Carlo than he did at home on his throne.
potential	expressing possibility; latent	The juvenile delinquent is a potential murderer.
potion	dose (of liquid)	Tristan and Lsolde drink a love potion in the first act of the opera.
potpourri	heterogeneous mixture; medley	He offered a potpourri of folk songs from many lands.
poultice	soothing application applied to sore and inflamed portions of the body	He was advised to apply a flaxseed poultice to the inflammation.
practicable	feasible	The board of directors decided that the plan was practicable and agreed to undertake the project.
practical	based on experience; useful	He was a practical man, opposed to theory
pragmatic	practical (as opposed to idealistic); concerned with the practical worth or impact of	something This coming trip to France should provide me with a pragmatic test of the value of my conversational French class.
pragmatist	practical person	No pragmatist enjoys becoming involved in a game that he can never win
prate	speak foolishly; boast idly	Let us not prate about our qualities; rather, let our virtues speak for themselves.
prattle	babble	The children prattle endlessly about their new toys.
preamble	introductory statement	In the preamble to the Constitution, the purpose of the document is set forth.
precarious	uncertain; risky	I think this stock is a precarious investment and advise against its purchase.
precedent	preceding in time, rank, etc	Our discussions, precedent to this event, certainly did not give you any reason to believe that we would adopt your proposal.
precedent	something preceding in time that may be used as an authority or guide for future action	This decision sets a precedent for future cases of a similar nature.
precept	practical rule guiding conduct	"Love thy neighbor as thyself" is a worthwhile precept.
precipice	cliff; dangerous position	Suddenly Indiana Jones found himself dangling from the edge of a precipice.
precipitate	headlong; rash	Do not be precipitate in this matter; investigate further.
precipitate	throw headlong; hasten	The removal of American political support appeared to have precipitated the downfall of the Marcos regime.
precipitous	steep; overhasty	This hill is difficult to climb because it is so precipitous; one slip, and our descent will be precipitous as well.
precise	exact	If you don't give me precise directions and a map, I'll never find your place.
preclude	make impossible; eliminate	This contract does not preclude my being employed by others at the same time that I am working for you.
precocious	advanced in development	By her rather adult manner of discussing serious topics, the child demonstrated that she was precocious.
precursor	forerunner	Though Gray and Burns share many traits with the Romantic poets who followed them, most critics consider them precursors of the Romantic Movement, not true Romantics.
predatory	plundering	The hawk is a predatory bird.
predecessor	former occupant of a post	I hope I can live up to the fine example set by my late predecessor in this office.
predilection	partiality; preference	Although the artist used various media from time to time, she had a predilection for watercolors.
preeminent	outstanding; superior	The king traveled to Boston because he wanted the preeminent surgeon in the field to perform the operation.
preempt	head off; forestall by acting first; appropriate for oneself; supplant	Hoping to preempt any attempts by the opposition to make educational reform a hot political issue, the candidate set out her own plan to revitalize the public schools.
preen	make oneself tidy in appearance; feel self-satisfaction	As Kitty preened before the mirror, carefully smoothing her shining hair, she couldn't help preening herself on her good looks.
prefactory	introductory	The chairman made a few prefactory remarks before he called on the first speaker.
prehensile	capable of grasping or holding	Monkeys use not only their arms and legs but also their prehensile tails in traveling through the trees.
prelate	church dignitary	The archbishop of Moscow and other high-ranking prelates visited the Russian Orthodox seminary.
prelude	introduction; forerunner	I am afraid that this border raid is the prelude to more serious attacks.
premeditate	plan in advance She had premeditated the murder for months, reading about common poisons and buying weed killer that	contained arsenic.
premise	assumption; postulate	Because Jack had based his argument upon a faulty premise, his opponent cheerfully pointed out the holes in his logic.
premonition	forewarning	We ignored these premonitions of disaster because they appeared to be based on childish fears.
premonitory	serving to warn	You should have visited a doctor as soon as you felt these premonitory chest pains.
preponderance	superiority of power, quantity, etc	The rebels sought to overcome the preponderance of strength of the government forces by engaging in guerrilla tactics.
preposterous	absurd; ridiculous	When the candidate tried to downplay his youthful experiments with marijuana by saying he hadn't inhaled, we all thought, "What a preposterous excuse!"
prerogative	privilege; unquestionable right	The President cannot levy taxes; that is the prerogative of the legislative branch of government.
presage	foretell	The vultures flying overhead presaged the discovery of the corpse in the desert.
prescience	ability to foretell the future	Given the current wave of Japan-bashing, it does not take prescience for me to foresee problems in our future trade relations with Japan.
presentiment	premonition; foreboding	Hamlet felt a presentiment about his meeting with Laertes.
prestige	impression produced by achievements or reputation	The wealthy man sought to obtain social prestige by contributing to popular charities.
presumptous	arrogant; taking liberties	It seems presumptous for one so relatively new to the field to challenge the conclusions of its leading experts.
pretentious	ostentatious; ambitious	I do not feel that your limited resources will permit you to carry out such a pretentious program.
preternatural	beyond that which is normal in nature	John's mother's total ability to tell when he was lying struck him as almost preternatural.
pretext	excuse	He looked for a good pretext to get out of paying a visit to his aunt.
prevail	induce; triumph over	He tried to prevail on her to type his essays for him.
prevalent	widespread; generally accepted	A radical committed to social change, Reed had no patience with the conservative views prevalent in the America of his day.
prevaricate	lie	Some people believe that to prevaricate in a good cause is justifiable and regard the statement as a "white lie".
prey	target of a hunt; victim	In Stalking the Wild Asparagus, Euell Gibbons has as his prey not wild beasts but wild plants.
prim	very precise and formal; exceedingly proper	Many people commented on the contrast between the prim attire of the young lady and the inappropriate clothing worn by her escort.
primogeniture	seniority by birth	By virtue of primogeniture, in some cultures the first-born child has many privileges denied his brothers and sisters.
primordial	existing at the beginning (of time); rudimentary	The Neanderthal Man is one of our primordial ancestors.
primp	dress or groom oneself with care	She primps for hours before a dance.
pristine	characteristic of earlier times; primitive, unspoiled	This area has been preserved in all its pristine wildness.
privation	hardship; want	In his youth, he knew hunger and privation.
privy	secret; hidden; not public	We do not care for privy chamber of government.
probe	explore with tools	The surgeon probed the wound for foreign matter before suturing it.
probity	uprightness; incorruptibility	Everyone took his probity for granted; his defalcations, therefore, shocked us all.
problematic	perplexing; unsettled: questionable	Given the many areas of conflict still awaiting resolution, the outcome of the peace talks remains problematic.
proclivity	inclination; natural tendency	The cross old lady has a proclivity to grumble.
procrastinate	postpone; delay	It is wise not to procrastinate; otherwise, we find ourselves bogged down in a mass of work that should have been finished long ago.
procurement	obtaining	The personnel department handles the procurement of new employees.
prod	poke; stir up; urge	If you prod him hard enough, he'll eventually clean his room.
prodigal	wasteful; reckless with money	The prodigal son squandered his inheritance.
prodigious	enormous; marvelous	He marveled at her prodigious appetite when he saw all the food she ate.
prodigy	highly gifted child; marvel	Menuhin was a prodigy, performing wonders on his violin when he was barely eight years old.
profane	violate; desecrate	Tourists are urged not to profane the sanctity of holy places by wearing improper garb.
profilgate	dissipated; wasteful; licentious	In this profilgate company, she lost all sense of decency.
profound	deep; not superficial; complete	Freud's remarkable insights into human behavior caused his fellow scientists to honor him as a profound thinker.
profusion	lavish expenditure; overabundant condition	Seldom have I seen food and drink served in such profusion as at the wedding feast.
progenitor	ancestor	The Roth family, whose progenitors emigrated from Germany early in the nineteenth century, settled in Peru, Illinois.
progeny	children; offspring	He was proud of his progeny but regarded George as the most promising of all his children.
prognosis	forecasted course of a disease; prediction	If the doctor's prognosis is correct, the patient will be in a coma for at least twenty-four hours.
prognosticate	predict	I prognosticate disaster unless we change our wasteful ways.
prohibitive	extremely high (of prices etc.)	The super computer's price was prohibitive.
projectile	missile	Man has always hurled projectiles at his enemy whether in the form of stones or of highly explosive shells.
proletarian	member of the working class	The aristocrats feared mob rule and gave the right to vote only to the wealthy, thus depending the proletarians of a voice in government.
proliferate	grow rapidly; spread; multiply	Times of economic hardship inevitably encourage countless get-rich-quick schemes to proliferate
prolific	abundantly fruitful	She was a prolific writer who produced as many as three books a year.
prolix	verbose; drawn out	Her prolix arguments irritated and bored the jury.
prolong	extend; draw out; lengthen	In their determination to discover ways to prolong human life, doctors fail to take into account that longer lives are not always happier ones.
prominent	conspicuous; notable; protruding	Have you ever noticed that Prince Charles's prominent ears make him resemble the big-eared character in Mad comics?
promiscuous	mixed indiscriminately; haphazard; irregular, particularly sexually	In the opera La Boheme, we get a picture of the promiscuous life led by the young artists of Paris.
promontory	headland	They erected a lighthouse on the promontory to warn approaching ships of their nearness to the shore.
prompt	cause; provoke; provide a cue for an actor	Whatever prompted you to ask for such a big piece of cake when you're on a diet?
promulgate	make known by official proclamation or publication	As soon as the Civil Service Commission promulgates the names of the successful candidates, we shall begin to hire members of our staff.
prone	inclined to; prostrate	She was prone to sudden fits of anger.
propagate	multiply; spread	Since bacteria propagate more quickly in unsanitary environments, it is important to keep hospital rooms clean.
propellant	substance that propels or drives forward	The development of our missile program has forced our scientists to seek more powerful propellants.
propensity	natural inclination	Convinced of his own talent, Sol has an unfortunate propensity to belittle the talents of others.
prophetic	having to do with predicting the future In interpreting Pharaoh's prophetic dream, Joseph said that the seven fat cows eaten by the seven lean	cows represented seven years of plenty followed by seven years of famine.
prophylactic	used to prevent disease	Despite all prophylactic measures introduced by the authorities, the epidemic raged until cool weather set in.
propinquity	nearness; kinship	Their relationship could not be explained as being based on mere propinquity: they were more than relatives; they were true friends.
propitiate	appease	The natives offered sacrifices to propitiate the gods.
propitious	favorable; kindly	I think it is advisable that we wait for a more propitious occasion to announce our plans; this is not a good time.
proponent	person who supports or proposes (an idea)	After the bill had been amended and re-amended in committee, even its original proponents didn't want to vote in its favor.
propound	put forth for analysis	In you discussion, you have propounded several questions; let us consider each one separately.
propriety	fitness; correct conduct	I want you to behave at this dinner with propriety; don't embarass me.
propulsive	driving forward	The jet plane has a greater propulsive power than the engine-driven plane.
prosaic	dull and unimaginative; matter-of-fact; factual	Though the ad writers had come up with a highly creative campaign to publicize the company's newest product, the head office rejected it for a more prosaic, down-to-earth approach.
proscenium	part of stage in front of curtain	In the theater-in-the-round there can be no proscenium or proscenium arch.
proscribe	ostracize; banish; outlaw	Antony, Octavius and Lepidus proscribed all those who had conspired against Julius Caesar.
proselytize	induce someone to convert to religion or belief	In these interfaith meetings, there must be no attempt to proselytize; we must respect all points of view.
prosody	the art of versification	This book on prosody contains a rhyming dictionary as well as samples of the various verse forms.
prosperity	good fortune; financial success; physical well-being	Promising to stay together "for richer, for poorer," the newlyweds vowed to be true to one another in prosperity and hardship alike.
prostrate	stretch out full on ground	He prostrated himself before the idol.
protean	versatile; able to take on many forms	A remarkably protean actor, Alec Guinness could take on any role.
protocol	diplomatic etiquette	We must run this state dinner according to protocol if we are to avoid offending any of our guests.
prototype	original work used as a model by others	The crude typewriter on display in this museum is the prototype of the elaborate machines in use today.
protract	prolong	Seeking to delay the union members' vote, the management team tried to protract the negotiations endlessly, but the union representatives saw through their strategy.
protrude	stick out	His fingers protruded from the holes in his gloves.
protuberance	protrusion; bulge	A ganglionic cyst is a fluid-filled tumor (generally benign) that develops near a joint membrane or tendon sheath, and that bulges beneath the skin, forming a protuberance.
provenance	origin or source of something	I am not interested in its provenance; I am more concerned with its usefulness than with its source.
provender	dry food; fodder	I am afraid of a severe winter because I have stored a large quantity of provender for the cattle.
provident	displaying foresight; thrifty; preparing for emergencies	In his usual provident manner, he had insured himself against this type of loss.
provincial	pertaining to a province; limited in outlook; unsophisticated	As provincial governor, Sir Henry administered the Queen's law in his remote corner of Canada.
provisional	tentative	The appointment is provisional; only on the approval of the board of directors will it be made permanent.
proviso	stipulation	I am ready to accept your proposal with the two proviso that you meet your obligations within the next two weeks.
provoke	stir up anger; cause retaliation	In order to prevent a sudden outbreak of hostilities, we must not provoke our foe.
proximity	nearness	The deer sensed the hunter's proximity and bounded away.
proxy	authorized agent	Please act as my proxy and vote for this slate of candidates in my absence.
prude	excessively modest or proper person	The X-rated film was definitely not for prudes.
prudent	cautious; careful	A miser hoards money not because he is prudent but because he is greedy.
prune	cut away; trim	With the help of her editor, she was able to prune her manuscript into publishable form.
pseudonym	pen name	Samuel Clemens' pseudonym was Mark Twain.
psychiatrist	a doctor who treats mental diseases	A psychiatrist often needs long conferences with his patient before a diagnosis can be made.
psychopathic	pertaining to mental derangement	The psychopathic patient suffers more frequently from a disorder of the nervous system than from a diseased brain.
psychosis	mental disorder	We must endeavor to find an outlet for the patient's repressed desires if we hope to combat this psychosis.
pterodactyl	extinct flying reptile	The remains of pterodactyls indicate that these flying reptiles had a wingspan of as much as twenty feet.
puerile	childish	His puerile pranks sometimes offended his more mature friends.
pugilist	boxer	The famous pugilist Cassius Clay changed his name to Muhammed Ali.
pugnacious	combative; disposed to fight	As a child he was pugnacious and fought with everyone.
puissant	powerful; strong; potent	We must keep his friendship for he will make a puissant ally.
pulchritude	beauty; comeliness	I do not envy the judges who have to select this year's Miss America from this collection of female pulchritude.
pulmonary	pertaining to the lungs	In his researches on pulmonary diseases, he discovered many facts about the lungs of animals and human beings.
pulsate	throb	We could see the blood vessels in his temple pulsate as he became more angry.
pulverize	crush or grind into very small particles	Before sprinkling the dried herbs into the stew, Michael first pulverized them into a fine powder.
pummel	beat	The severity with which he was pummeled was indicated by the bruises he displayed on his head and face.
punctilious	laying stress on niceties of conduct or form; precise	We must be punctilious in our planning of this affair, for any error may be regarded as a personal affront.
pundit	learned Hindu; any learned person; authority on a subject	Even though he discourses on the matter like a pundit, he is actually rather ignorant about this topic.
pungency	sharpness; stinging quality	The pungency of the cigarette smoke made me cough.
punitive	punishing	He asked for punitive measures against the offender.
puny	insignificant; tiny; weak	Our puny efforts to stop the flood were futile.
purchase	firm grasp or footing	The mountaineer struggled to get a proper purchase on the slippery rock.
purgatory	place of spiritual expiation	In this purgatory, he could expect no help from his comrades.
purge	clean by removing impurities; clear of changes	If you are to be purged of the charge of contempt of Congress, you must be willing to answer the questions previously asked.
purport	intention; meaning	If the purport of your speech was to arouse the rabble, you succeeded admirably.
purveyor	furnisher of foodstuffs; caterer	As purveyor of rare wines and viands, he traveled through France and Italy every year in search of new products to sell.
pusillanimous	cowardly; fainthearted	You should be ashamed of your pusillanimous conduct during this dispute.
putative	supposed; reputed	Although there are some doubts, the putative author of this work is Massinger.
putrid	foul; rotten; decayed	The gangrenous condition of the wound was indicated by the putrid smell when the bandages were removed.
pyre	heap of combustible material, esp. for burning a corpse	The mortician put pyre on the corpse before burning a corpse.
pyromaniac	person with an insane desire to set things on fire	The detectives searched the area for the pyromaniac who had set these costly fires.
quack	charlatan; impostor	Do not be misled by the exorbitant claims of this quack; he cannot cure you.
quadruped	four-footed animal	Most mammals are quadrupeds.
quaff	drink with relish	As we quaffed our ale, we listened to the gay songs of the students in the tavern.
quagmire	soft, wet, boggy land; complex or dangerous situation from which it is difficult to free oneself	Up to her knees in mud, Myra wondered how on earth she was going to extricate herself from this quagmire.
quail	cower; lose heart	He was afraid that he would quail in the face of danger.
quaint	odd; old-fashioned; picturesque	Her quaint clothes and old-fashioned language marked her as an eccentric.
qualified	limited; restricted	Unable to give the candidate full support, the mayor gave him only a qualified endorsement.
qualms	misgivings	His qualms of conscience had become so great that he decided to abandon his plans.
quandary	dilemma	When the two colleges to which he had applied accepted him, he was in a quandary as to which one he should attend.
quarantine	isolation of a person, place, or ship to prevent spread of infection	We will have to place this house under quarantine until we determine the nature of the disease.
quarry	dig into	They quarried blocks of marble out of the hillside.
quarry	victim; object of a hunt	The police closed in on their quarry.
quash	subdue; crush; squash	The authorities acted quickly to quash the student rebellion, sending in tanks to cow the demonstrators.
quay	dock; landing place	Because of the captain's carelessness, the ship crashed into the quay.
queasy	easily nauseated; squeamish	As the ship left the harbor, he became queasy and thought that he was going to suffer from seasickness.
quell	put down; quiet	The police used fire hoses and teat gas to quell the rioters.
querulous	fretful; whining	His classmates were repelled by his querulous and complaining statements.
queue	line	They stood patiently in the queue outside the movie theatre.
quibble	equivocate; play on words	Do not quibble; I want a straightforward and definite answer.
quiescent	at rest; dormant	After this geyser erupts, it will remain quiescent for twenty-four hours.
quietude	tranquillity	He was impressed by the air of quietude and peace that pervaded the valley.
quintessence	purest and highest embodiment	Noel Coward displayed the quintessence of wit.
quip	taunt	You are unpopular because you are too free with your quips and sarcastic comments.
quirk	startling twise; caprice	By a quirk of fate, he found himself working for the man whom he had discharged years before.
quisling	traitor who aids invaders	In his conquest of Europe, Hitler was aided by the quislings who betrayed their own people and served in the puppet governments established by the Nazis.
quiver	case for arrows	Robin Hood reached back and plucked one last arrow from his quiver.
quixotic	idealistic but impractical	His head is in the clouds; he is constantly presenting these quixotic schemes.
quizzical	bantering; comical; humorously serious	Will Rogers' quizzical remarks endeared him to his audiences.
quorum	number of members necessary to conduct a meeting	The senator asked for a roll call to determine whether a quorum was present.
quotidian	daily; commonplace; customary	To Philip, each new day of his internship was filled with excitement; he could not dismiss his rounds as merely quotidian routine.
rabid	like a fanatic; furious	He was a rabid follower of the Dodgers and watched them play whenever he could go to the ball park.
raconteur	story-teller	My father was a gifted raconteur with an unlimited supply of anecdotes.
ragamuffin	person wearing tattered clothes	He felt sorry for the ragamuffin who was begging for food and gave him money to buy a meal.
rail	scold; rant	You may rail at him all you want; you will never change him.
raiment	clothing	"How can I go to the ball?" asked Cinderella. "I have no raiment fit to wear".
rakish	stylish; sporty	He wore his hat at a rakish and jaunty angle.
ramble	wander aimlessly (physically or mentally)	Listening to the teacher ramble, Judy wondered whether he'd ever get to his point.
ramification	branching out; subdivision	We must examine all the ramifications of this problem.
ramify	divide into branches or subdivisions	When the plant begins to ramify, it is advisable to nip off most of the new branches.
ramp	slope; inclined plane	The house was built with ramps instead of stairs in order to enable the man in the wheelchair to move easily from room to room and floor to floor.
rampant	rearing up on hind legs; unrestrained	The rampant weeds in the garden killed all the flowers that had been planted in the spring.
rampart	defensive mound on earth	"From the ramparts we watched" as the fighting continued.
ramshackle	rickety; falling apart	The boys propped up the ramshackle clubhouse with a couple of boards.
rancid	having the odor of stale fat	A rancid odor filled the ship's galley and nauseated the crew.
rancor	bitterness; hatred	Let us forget out rancor and cooperate in this new endeavor.
random	without definite purpose, plan, or aim; haphazard	Although the sponsor of the raffle claimed all winners were chosen at random, people had their suspicions when the grand prize went to the sponsor's brother-in-law.
rankle	irritate; fester	The memory of having been jilted rankled him for years.
rant	rave; speak bombastically	As we heard him rant on the platform, we could not understand his strange popularity with many people.
rapacious	excessively grasping; plundering	Hawks and other rapacious birds prey on variety of small animals.
rapport	emotional closeness; harmony	In team teaching, it is important that all teachers in the group have good rapport with one another.
rarefied	made less dense [of a gas]	The mountain climbers had difficulty breathing in the rarefied atmosphere.
raspy	grating; harsh	The sergeant's raspy voice grated on the recruits' ears.
ratify	approve formally; verify	Before the treaty could go into effect, it had to be ratified by the president.
ratiocination	reasoning; act of drawing conclusions from premises	While Watson was a man of average intelligence, Holmes was a genius, whose gift for ratiocination made him a superb detective.
rationalization	bringing into conformity with reason	All attempts at rationalization at this time are doomed to failure; tempers and emotions run too high for intelligent thought to prevail.
rationalize	reason; justify an improper act	Do not try to rationalize your behavior by blaming your companions.
raucous	harsh and shrill	His raucous laughter irritated me and grated on my ears.
ravage	plunder; despoil	The marauding army ravaged the countryside.
rave	overwhelmingly favorable review	Though critic John Simon seldom has a good word to say about contemporary plays, his review of All in the Timing was a total rave.
ravel	fall apart into tangles; unravel or untwist; entangle	A sigle thread pulled loose, and the entire scarf started to ravel.
ravenous	extremely hungry	The revenous dog upset several garbage pails in its search for food.
ravine	narrow valley with steep sides	Steeper than a gully, less precipitous than a canyon, a ravine is, like them, the product of years of erosion.
raze	destroy completely	The owners intend to raze the hotel and erect an office building on the site.
reactionary	recoiling from progress; retrograde	His program was reactionary since it sought to abolish many of the social reforms instituted by the previous administration.
realm	kingdom; sphere	The realm of possibilities for the new invention was endless.
reaper	one who harvests grain	Death, the Grim Reaper, cuts down men and women, just as a farmer cuts down the ripened grain.
rebate	discount	We offer a rebate of ten percent to those who pay cash.
rebuff	snub; beat back	She rebuffed his invitation so smoothly that he did not realize he had been snubbed.
rebus	puzzle in which pictures stand for words	A coven of witches beside a tree is a possible rebus for the town Coventry.
rebuttal	refutation; response with contrary evidence	The defense lawyer confidently listened to the prosecutor sum up his case, sure that she could answer his arguments in her rebuttal.
recalcitrant	obstinately stubborn	Donkeys are reputed to be the most recalcitrant of animals.
recant	repudiate; withdraw previous statement	Unless you recant your confession, you will be punished severely.
recapitulate	summarize	Let us recapitulate what has been said thus far before going ahead.
receptive	quick or willing to receive ideas, suggestions, etc	Adventure-loving Huck Finn proved a receptive audience for Tom's tales of buried treasure and piracy.
recession	withdrawal; retreat; time of low economic activity	The slow recession of the flood waters created problems for the crews working to restore power to the area.
recidivism	habitual return to crime	Prison reformers in the United States are disturbed by the high rate of recidivism; the number of persons serving second and third terms indicates the failure of the prisons to rehabilitate the inmates.
recipient	receiver	Although he had been the recipient of many favors, he was not grateful to his benefactor.
reciprocal	mutual; exchangeable; interacting	The two nations signed a reciprocal trade agreement.
reciprocate	repay in kind	If they attack us, we shall be compelled to reciprocate and bomb their territory.
recluse	hermit	The recluse lived in a hut in the forest.
reconcile	correct inconsistencies; become friendly after a quarrel	Every time we try to reconcile our checkbook with the bank statement, we quarrel. However, despite these monthly lovers' quarrels, we always manage to reconcile.
recondite	abstruse; profound; secret	He read many recondite books in order to obtain the material for the scholarly thesis.
reconnaissance	survey of enemy by soldiers; reconnoitering	If you encounter any enemy soldiers during your reconnaissance, capture them for questioning.
recount	narrate or tell; count over again	About to recount the latest adventure of Sherlock Holmes, Watson lost track of exactly how many cases Holmes had solved and refused to begin his tale until he'd recounted them one by one.
recourse	resorting to help when in trouble	The boy's only recourse was to appeal to his father for aid.
recrimination	countercharges	Loud and angry recriminations were her answer to his accusations.
rectify	correct	I want to rectify my error before it is too late.
rectitude	uprightness	He was renowned for his rectitude and integrity.
recumbent	reclining; lying down completely or in part	The command "AT EASE" does not permit you to take a recumbent position.
recuperate	recover	The doctors were worried because the patient did not recuperate as rapidly as they had expected.
recurrent	occurring again and again	These recurrent attacks disturbed us and we consulted a physician.
redolent	fragrant; odorous; suggestive of an odor	Even though it is February, the air is redolent of spring.
redoubtable	formidable; causing fear	During the Cold War period, neighboring countries tried not to offend the Russians because they could be redoubtable foes.
redress	remedy; compensation	Do you mean to tell me that I can get no redress for my injuries?
redundant	superfluous; excessively wordy; repetitious	Your composition is redundant; you can easily reduce its length.
reek	emit (odor)	The room reeked with stale tobacco smoke.
refectory	dining hall	In this huge refectory, we can feed the entire student body at one sitting.
refraction	bending of a ray of light	When you look at a stick inserted in water, it looks bent because of the refraction of the light by the water.
refractory	stubborn; unmanageable	The refractory horse was eliminated from the race when he refused to obey the jockey.
refrain	v. abstain from; resist n. chorus	Whenever he heard a song with a lively chorus, Sol could never refrain from joining in on the refrain.
refurbish	renovate; make bright by polishing	The flood left a deposit of mud on everything; it was necessary to refurbish our belongings.
refute	disprove	The defense called several respectable witnesses who were able to refute the false testimony of the prosecution's only witness.
regal	royal	Prince Albert had a regal manner.
regale	entertain	John regaled us with tales of his adventures in Africa.
regatta	boat or yacht race	Many boating enthusiasts followed the regatta in their own yachts.
regeneration	spiritual rebirth	Modern penologists strive for the regeneration of the prisoners.
regicide	murder of a king or queen	The beheading of Mary Queen of Scots was an act of regicide.
regime	method or system of government	When a Frenchman mentions the Old Regime, he refers to the government existing before the revolution.
regimen	prescribed diet and habits	I doubt whether the results warrant our living under such a strict regimen.
rehabilitate	restore to proper condition	We must rehabilitate those whom we send to prison.
reimburse	repay	Let me know what you have spent and I will reimburse you.
reiterate	repeat	He reiterated the warning to make sure everyone understood it.
rejoinder	retort; comeback; reply	When someone has been rude to me, I find it particularly satisfying to come up with a quick rejoinder.
rejuvenate	make young again	The charlatan claimed that his elixir would rejuvenate the aged and weary.
relapse	fall back or sink again	The economy relapsed into a depression from the peak.
relegate	banish; consign to inferior position	If we relegate these experts to minor posts because of their political persuasions, we shall lose their valuable services.
relent	give in	When her stern father would not relent and allow her to marry Robert Browning, Elizabeth Barrett eloped with her suitor.
relevant	pertinent; referring to the case in hand Teri was impressed by how relevant Virginia Woolf's remarks were to her as a woman writer; it was as if	Woolf had been writing with Teri's situation in mind.
relic	surviving remnant; memento	Egypt's Department of Antiquities prohibits tourists from taking mummies and other ancient relics out of the country.
relinquish	abandon	I will relinquish my claims to this property if you promise to retain my employees.
relish	savor; enjoy	I relish a good joke as much as anyone else.
remediable	reparable	Let us be grateful that the damage is remediable.
reminiscence	recollection	Her reminiscences of her experiences are so fascinating that she ought to write a book.
remiss	negligent	He was accused of being remiss in his duty when the prisoner escaped.
remission	temporary moderation of disease symptoms; cancellation of a debt; forgiveness or pardon	Though Senator Tsongas had been treated for cancer, his symptoms were in remission, and he was considered fit to handle the strains of a Presidential race.
remnant	remainder	I suggest that you wait until the store places the remnants of these goods on sale.
remonstrance	protest; objection	The authorities were deaf to the pastor's remonstrances about the lack of police protection in the area.
remorse	guilt; self-reproach	The murderer felt no remorse for his crime.
remunerative	compensating; rewarding	I find my new work so renumerative that I may not return to my previous employment.
rend	split; tear apart	In his grief, he tried to rend his garments.
render	deliver; provide; represent	He rendered aid to the needy and indigent.
rendezvous	meeting place	The two fleets met at the rendezvous at the appointed time.
rendition	translation; artistic interpretation of a song, etc	The audience cheered enthusiastically as she completed her rendition of the aria.
renegade	deserter; traitor	Because he had abandoned his post and joined forces with the Indians, his fellow officers considered the hero of Dances with Wolves a renegade.
renege	deny; go back on	He reneged on paying off his debt.
renounce	abandon; disown; repudiate	Even though she knew she would be burned at the stake as a witch, Joan of Arc refused to renounce her belief that her voices came from God.
renovate	restore to good condition; renew	They claim that they can renovate worn shoes so that they look like new ones.
renown	fame	For many years an unheralded researcher, Barbara McClintock gained international renown when she won the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine.
rent	tear or rip; split	The conflict over abortion threatens to split our nation, creating a rent in the social fabric that will be difficult to mend.
reparable	capable of being repaired	Fortunately, the damages we suffered in the accident were reparable and our car looks brand new.
reparation	amends; compensation	At the peace conference, the defeated country promised to pay reparations to the victors.
repartee	clever reply	He was famous for his witty repartee and his sarcasm.
repeal	revoke; annul	What would the effect on our society be if we decriminalized drug use by repealing the laws against the possession and sale of narcotics?
repellent	driving away; unattractive	Mosquitoes find the odor so repellent that they leave any spot where this liquid has been sprayed.
repercussion	rebound; reverberation; reaction	I am afraid that this event will have serious repercussions.
repertoire	list of works of music, drama, etc., a performer is prepared to present	The opera company decided to include Madame Butterfly in its repertoire for the following season.
repine	fret; complain	There is no sense repining over the work you have left undone.
replenish	fill up again	Before she could take another backpacking trip, Carla had to replenish her stock of freeze-dried foods.
replete	filled to capacity; abundantly supplied	The book is replete with humorous situations.
replica	copy	Are you going to hang this replica of the Declaration of Independence in the classroom or in the auditorium?
replicate	reproduce; duplicate	To the chagrin of the scientists, they were unable to replicate the results of their controversial experiment.
repository	storehouse	Libraries are repositories of the world's best thoughts.
reprehensible	deserving blame	Your vicious conduct in this situation is reprehensible.
repress	restrain; crush; oppress	Anne's parents tried to curb her impetuosity without repressing her boundless high spirits.
reprieve	temporary stay	During the twenty-four-hour reprieve, the lawyers sought to make the stay of execution permanent.
reprimand	reprove severely	I am afraid that my parents will reprimand me when I show them my report card.
reprisal	retaliation	I am confident that we are ready for any reprisals the enemy may undertake.
reprise	recurrent action; musical repetition; repeat performance	At Waterloo, it was not the effect of any one skirmish that exhausted Colonel Audly; rather it was the cumulative effect of the constant reprises that left him spent.
reproach	blame; censure	I want my work to be above reproach and without error
reprobate	person hardened in sin, devoid of a sense of decency	I cannot understand why he has so many admirers if he is the reprobate you say he is.
reprobation	severe disapproval	The students showed their reprobation of his act by refusing to talk with him.
reprove	censure; rebuke	The principal reproved the students when they became unruly in the auditorium.
repudiate	disown; disavow	He announced that he would repudiate all debts incurred by his wife.
repugnance	loathing	She looked at the snake with repugnance.
repulsion	act of driving back; distaste	The repulsion of the enemy forces was not accomplished bloodlessly; many of the defenders were wounded in driving the enemy back.
reputable	respectable	If you want to buy antiques, look for a reputable dealer; far too many dealers today pass off fakes as genuine antiques.
reputed	supposed	He is the reputed father of the child.
requiem	mass for the dead; dirge	They played Mozart's Requiem at the funeral.
requisite	necessary requirement	Many colleges state that a student must offer three years of a language as a requisite for admission.
requite	repay; revenge	The wretch requited his benefactors by betraying them.
rescind	cancel	Because of public resentment, the king had to rescind his order.
reserve	self-control; formal but distant manner	Although some girls were attracted by Mark's reserve, Judy was put off by it, for she felt his aloofness indicated a lack of openness.
residue	remainder; balance	In his will, he requested that after payment of debts, taxes, and funeral expenses, the residue be given to his wife.
resignation	patient submissiveness; statement that one is quitting a job	If Bob Cratchit had not accepted Scrooge's bullying with timid resignation, he might have gotten up the nerve to hand in his resignation.
resilient	elastic; having the power of springing back	Highly resilient, steel makes excellent bedsprings.
resolution	determination	Nothing could shake his resolution to succeed despite all difficulties.
resolve	decide; settle; solve	Homes resolved to travel to Bohemia to resolve the dispute between Irene Adler and the King.
resolve	determination	Nothing could shake his resolve that his children would get the best education that money could buy.
resonant	echoing; resounding; deep and full in sound	The deep, resonant voice of the actor James Earl Jones makes him particulary effective when he appears on stage.
respiration	breathing; exhalation	The doctor found that the patient's years of smoking had adversely affected both his lung capacity and his rate of respiration.
respite	delay in punishment; interval of relief; rest	The judge granted the condemned man a respite to enable his attorneys to file an appeal.
resplendent	brilliant; lustrous	The toreador wore a resplendent costume called a suit of lights.
responsiveness	state of reacting readily to appeals, order, etc	The audience cheered and applauded, delighting the performers by its responsiveness.
restitution	reparation; indemnification	He offered to make restitution for the window broken by his son.
restive	restlessly impatient; obstinately resisting control	Waiting impatiently in the line to see Santa Claus, even the best-behaved children grow restive and start to fidget.
restraint	controlling force	She dreamt of living an independent life, free of all restraints.
resumption	taking up again; recommencement	During the summer break, Don had not realized how much he missed university life: at the resumption of classes, however, he felt marked excitement and pleasure.
resurgent	rising again after defeat, etc	The resurgent nation surprised everyone by its quick recovery after total defeat.
resuscitate	revive	The lifeguard tried to resuscitate the drowned child by applying artificial respiration.
retain	keep; employ	Fighting to retain his seat in Congress, Senator Foghorn retained a new manager to head his reelection campaign.
retaliate	repay in kind (usually for bad treatment)	Fear that we will retaliate immediately deters our foe from attacking us.
retentive	holding; having a good memory	The pupil did not need to spend much time in study as he had a retentive mind.
reticent	reserved; uncommunicative; inclined to silence Hughes preferred reticent employees to loquacious ones, noting that the formers' dislike of idle chatter	might ensure their discretion about his affairs.
retinue	following; attendants	The queen's retinue followed her down the aisle.
retiring	modest; shy	Given Susan't retiring personality, no one expected her to take up public speaking; surprisingly enough, she became a star of the school debate team.
retort	quick, sharp reply	Even when it was advisable for her to keep her mouth shut, she was always ready with a retort.
retraction	withdrawal	He dropped his libel suit after the newspaper published a retraction of its statement.
retrench	cut down; economize	If they were to be able to send their children to college, they would have to retrench.
retribution	vengeance; compensation; punishment for offenses	The evangelist maintained that an angry deity would exact retribution from the sinners.
retrieve	recover; find and bring in	The dog was intelligent and quickly learned to retrieve the game killed by the hunter.
retroactive	taking effect before its enactment (as a law) or imposition (as a tax)	Because the new pension law was retroactive to the first of the year, even though Martha had retired in February she was eligible for the pension.
retrograde	go backwards; degenerate	Instead of advancing, our civilization seems to have retrograded in ethics and culture.
retrospective	looking back on the past	It is only when we become retrospective that we can appreciate the tremendous advances made during this century.
revelry	boisterous merrymaking	New Year's Eve is a night of revelry.
reverberate	echo; resound	The entire valley reverberated with the sound of the church bells.
reverent	respectful	His reverent attitude was appropriate in a house of worship.
reverie	daydream; musing	He was awakened from his reverie by the teacher's question.
revile	slander; vilify	He was avoided by all who feared that he would revile and abuse them if they displeased him.
revoke	cancel; retract	Repeat offenders who continue to drive under the influence of alcohol face having their driver's licenses permanently revoked.
revulsion	sudden violent change of feeling; negative reaction	Many people in this country who admired dictatorships underwent a revulsion when they realized what Hitler and Mussolini were trying to do.
rhapsodize	to speak or write in an exaggeratedly enthusiastic manner	She greatly enjoyed her Hawaiian vacation and rhapsodized about it for weeks.
rhetoric	art of effective communication; insincere or grandiloquent language	All writers, by necessity, must be skilled in rhetoric.
ribald	wanton; profane	He sang a ribald song that offended many of the more prudish listeners.
rider	amendment or clause added to a legislative bill	Senator Foghorn said he would support Senator Filibuster's tax reform bill only if Filibuster agreed to add an antipollution rider to the bill.
rife	abundant; current	In the face of the many rumors of scandal, which are rife at the moment, it is best to remain silent.
rift	opening; break	The plane was lost in the stormy sky until the pilot saw the city through a rift in the clouds.
rig	fix or manipulate	The ward boss was able to rig the election by bribing people to stuff the ballot boxes with ballots marked in his candidate's favor.
rigid	stiff and unyielding; strict; hard and unbending	By living with a man to whom she was not married, George Eliot broke Victorian society's most rigid rule of respectable behavior.
rigor	severity	Many settlers could not stand the rigors of the New England winters.
rile	vex; irritate; muddy	Red had a hair-trigger temper: he was an easy man to rile.
riveting	absorbing; engrossing	The reviewer described Byatt's novel Possession as a riveting tale: absorbed in the story, he had finished it in a single evening.
rivulet	small stream	As the rains continued, the trickle of water running down the hillside grew into a rivulet that threatened to wash away a portion of the slope.
robust	vigorous; strong	The candidate for the football team had a robust physique.
rococo	ornate; highly decorated	The rococo style in furniture and architecture, marked by scrollwork and excessive decoration, flourished during the middle of the eighteenth century.
roil	to make liquids murky by stirring up sediment; to disturb	Be careful when you pour not to roil the wine; if you stir up the sediment you'll destroy the flavor.
roseate	rosy; optimistic	I am afraid you will have to alter your roseate views in the light of the distressing news that has just arrived.
roster	list	They print the roster of players in the season's program.
rostrum	platform for speech-making; pulpit	The crowd murmured angrily and indicated that they did not care to listen to the speaker who was approaching the rostrum.
rote	repetition	He recited the passage by rote and gave no indication he understood what he was saying.
rotunda	circular building or hall covered with a dome	His body lay in state in the rotunda of the Capitol.
rotundity	roundness; sonorousness of speech	Washington Irving emphasized the rotundity of the governor by describing his height and circumference.
rousing	lively; stirring	"And now, let's have a rousing welcome for TV's own Roseanne Arnold, who'll lead us in a rousing rendition of 'The Star-Spangled Banner.'"
rout	stampede; drive out	The reinforcements were able to rout the enemy
rubble	fragments	Ten years after World War II, some of the rubble left by enemy bombings could still be seen.
rubric	title or heading (in red print); directions for religious ceremony; protocol	In ordaining the new priests, the bishop carefully observed all the rubrics for the ordination service.
ruddy	reddish; healthy-looking	His ruddy features indicated that he had spent much time in the open.
rudimentary	not developed; elementary	His dancing was limited to a few rudimentary steps.
rueful	regretful; sorrowful; dejected	The artist has captured the sadness of childhood in his portrait of the boy with the rueful countenance.
ruffian	bully; scoundrel	The ruffians threw stones at the police.
ruminate	chew the cud; ponder	We cannot afford to wait while you ruminate upon these plans.
rummage	ransack; thoroughly search	When we rummaged through the trunks in the attic, we found many souvenirs of our childhood days.
runic	mysterious; set down in an ancient alphabet	Tolkien's use of Old English words and inscriptions in the runic alphabet give The Lord of the Rings its atmosphere of antiquity.
ruse	trick; stratagem	You will not be able to fool your friends with such an obvious ruse.
rustic	pertaining to country people; uncouth	The backwoodsman looked out place in his rustic attire.
rusticate	banish to the country; dwell in the country	I like city life so much that I can never understand how people can rusticate in the suburbs.
ruthless	pitiless	The escaped convict was a dangerous and ruthless murderer.
saboteur	one who commits sabotage; destroyer of property	Members of the Resistance acted as saboteurs, blowing up train lines to prevent supplies from reaching the Nazi army.
saccharine	cloyingly sweet	She tried to ingratiate herself, speaking sweetly and smiling a saccharine smile.
sacrilegious	desecrating; profane	His stealing of the altar cloth was a very sacrilegious act.
sacrosanct	most sacred; inviolable	The brash insurance salesman invaded the sacrosanct privacy of the office of the president of the company.
sadistic	inclined to cruelty	If we are to improve conditions in this prison, we must first get rid of the sadistic warden.
saga	Scandinavian myth; any legend	This is a saga of the sea and the men who risk their lives on it.
sagacious	keen; shrewd; having insight	He is much too sagacious to be fooled by a trick like that.
sage	person celebrated for wisdom	Hearing tales of a mysterious Master of All Knowledge who lived in the hills of Tibet, Sandy was possessed with a burning desire to consult the legendary sage.
salacious	lascivious; lustful	Chaucer's monk is not pious but salacious, a teller of lewd tales and ribald jests.
salient	prominent	One of the salient features of that newspaper is its excellent editorial page.
saline	salty	The slightly saline taste of this mineral water is pleasant.
sallow	yellowish; sickly in color	We were disturbed by his sallow complexion, which was due to jaundice.
salubrious	healthful	Many people with hay fever move to more salubrious sections of the country during the months of August and September.
salutary	tending to improve; beneficial; wholesome	The punishment had a salutary effect on the boy, as he became a model student.
salvage	rescue from loss	All attempts to salvage the wrecked ship failed.
sanctimonious	displaying ostentatious or hypocritical devoutness	You do not have to be so sanctimonious to prove that you are devout.
sanction	approve; ratify	Nothing will convince me to sanction the engagement of my daughter to such a worthless young man.
sanguinary	bloody	The battle of lwo Jina was unexpectedly sanguinary with many casualties.
sanguine	cheerful; hopeful	Let us not be too sanguine about the outcome; something could go wrong.
sap	diminish; undermine	The element kryptonite had an unhealthy effect on Superman: it sapped his strength.
sarcasm	scornful remarks, stinging rebuke	His feelings were hurt by the sarcasm of his supposed friends.
sardonic	disdainful; sarcastic; cynical	The sardonic humor of nightclub comedians who satirize or ridicule patrons in the audience strikes some people as amusing and others as rude.
sartorial	pertaining to tailors	He was as famous for the sartorial splendor of his attire as he was for his acting.
sate	satisfy to the full; cloy	Its hunger sated, the lion dozed.
satellite	small body revolving around a larger one	During the first few years of the Space Age, hundreds of satellites were launched by Russia and the United States.
satiate	surfeit; satisfy fully	The guests, having eaten until they were satiated, now listened inattentively to the speakers.
satire	form of literature in which irony, sarcasm, and ridicule are employed to attack vice and folly	Gulliver's Travels, which is regarded by many as a tale for children, is actually a bitter satire attacking human folly.
satirical	mocking	The humor of cartoonists Gary Trudeau often is satirical; though the comments of the Doonesbury characters, Trudeau ridicules political corruption and folly.
saturate	soak	Their clothes were saturated by the rain.
saturnine	gloomy	Do not be misled by his saturnine countenance; he is not as gloomy as he looks.
satyr	half-human, half-bestial being in the court of Dionysus, portrayed as wanton and cunning	He was like a satyr in his lustful conduct.
saunter	stroll slowly	As we sauntered through the park, we stopped frequently to admire the spring flowers.
savant	scholar	Our faculty includes many worldfamous savants.
savor	enjoy; have a distinctive flavor, smell, or quality	Relishing his triumph, Costner especially savored the chagrin of the critics who had predicted his failure.
savory	tasty; pleasing, attractive, or agreeable	Julia Child's recipes enable amateur chefs to create savory delicacies for their guests.
scabbard	case for a sword blade; sheath	The drill master told the recruit to wipe the blood from his sword before slipping it back into the scabbard.
scad	a great quantity	Refusing Dave's offer to lend him a shirt, Phil replied, "No, thanks: I've got scads of clothes".
scaffold	temporary platform for workers; bracing framework; platform for execution	Before painting the house, the workers put up a scaffold to allow them to work on the second story.
scale	climb up; ascend	To locate a book on the top shelf of the stacks, Lee had to scale an exceptionally rickety ladder.
scanty	meager; insufficient	Thinking his helping of food was scanty, Oliver Twist asked for more.
scapegoat	someone who bears the blame for others	After the Challenger disaster, NASA searched for scapegoats on whom they could cast the blame.
scavenge	hunt through discarded materials for usable items; search, especially for food	If you need car parts that the dealers no longer stock, try scavenging for odd bits and pieces at the auto wreckers' yards.
scenario	plot outline; screenplay; opera libretto	Scaramouche startled the other actors in the commedia troupe when he suddenly departed from their customary scenario and began to improvise.
schematic	relating to an outline or diagram; using a system of symbols	In working out the solution to an analytical logic question, you may find it helpful to construct a simple schematic diagram illustrating the relationships between the items of information given in the question.
schism	division; split	Let us not widen the schism by further bickering.
scintilla	shred; least bit	You have not produced a scintilla of evidence to support your argument.
scintillate	sparkle; flash	I enjoy her dinner parties because the food is excellent and the conversation scintillates.
scoff	mock; ridicule	He scoffed at dentists until he had his first toothache.
scotch	stamp out; thwart; hinder	Heather tried to scotch the rumor that she had stolen her best friend's fiance.
scourge	lash; whip; severe punishment	They feared the plague and regarded it as a deadly scourge.
scruple	fret about; hesitate, for ethical reasons	Fearing that her husband had become involved in an affair, she did not scruple to read his diary.
scrupulous	conscientious; extremely thorough	I can recommend him for a position of responsibility for I have found him a very scrupulous young man.
scrutinize	examine closely and critically	Searching for flaws, the sergeant scrutinized every detail of the private's uniform.
scuffle	struggle confusedly; move off in a confused hurry	The twins briefly scuffled, wrestling to see which of them would get the toy. When their big brother yelled, "Let go of my Gameboy!" they scuffled off down the hall.
scurrilous	obscene; indecent	Your scurrilous remarks are especially offensive because they are untrue.
scurry	move briskly	The White Rabbit had to scurry to get to his appointment on time.
scurvy	despicable; contemptible	Peter Pan sneered at Captain Hook and his scurvy crew.
scuttle	sink	The sailors decided to scuttle their vessel rather than surrender it to the enemy.
seamy	sordid; unwholesome	In the Godfather, Michael Corleone is unwilling to expose his wife and children to the seamy side of his life as the son of a Mafia don.
sear	char or burn; brand	Accidentally brushing against the hot grill, she seared her hand badly.
seasoned	experienced	Though pleased with her new batch of rookies, the basketball coach wished she had a few more seasoned players on the team.
secession	withdrawal	The secession of the Southern states provided Lincoln with his first major problem after his inauguration.
seclusion	isolation; solitude	One moment she loved crowds; the next, she sought seclusion.
secrete	hide away or cache; produce and release a substance into an organism	The pack rat secretes odds and ends in its nest; the pancreas secretes insulin in the islets of Langerhans.
sectarian	narrow-minded; limited in scope	As university chaplain, she sought to address universal religious issues and not limit herself to mere sectarian concerns.
secular	worldly; not pertaining to church matters; temporal	The church leaders decided not interfere in secular matters.
sedate	composed; grave	The parents were worried because they felt their son was too quiet and sedate.
sedative	calming drug or influence	It is dangerous to drive after taking the sedative; it brings drowsiness.
sedentary	requiring sitting	Because he had a sedentary occupation, he decided to visit a gymnasium weekly.
sedition	resistance to authority; insubordination	His words, though not treasonous in themselves, were calculated to arouse thoughts of sedition.
sedulous	diligent	The young woman was so sedulous that she received a commendation for her hard work.
seedy	run-down; decrepit; disreputable	I would rather stay in dormitory lodgings in a decent youth hostel than have a room of my own in a seedy downtown hotel.
seemly	proper; appropriate	Lady Bracknell did not think it was seemly for Ernest to lack a proper family; no baby abandoned on a doorstep could grow up to marry her daughter.
seep	ooze; trickle	During the rainstorm, water seeped through the crack in the basement wall and damaged the floor boards.
seethe	be disturbed; boil	The nation was seething with discontent as the nobleman continued their arrogant ways.
seine	net for catching fish	When the shad run during the spring, you may see fishermen with seines along the banks of our coastal rivers.
seismic	pertaining to earthquakes	The Richter scale is a measurement of seismic disturbances.
semblance	outward appearance; guise	Although this book has a semblance of wisdom and scholarship, a careful examination will reveal many errors and omissions.
seminal	germinal; influencing future developments; related to seed or semen	Although Freud has generally been regarded as a seminal thinker who shaped the course of psychology, his psychoanalytic methods have come under attack recently.
seminary	school for training future ministers; secondary school, especially for young women	Sure of his priestly vocation, Terrence planned to pursue his theological training at the local Roman Catholic seminary.
senility	old age; feeble mindedness of old age	Most of the decisions are being made by the junior members of the company because of the senility of the president.
sensual	devoted to the pleasures of the senses; carnal; voluptous	I cannot understand what caused him to drop his sensual way of life and become so ascetic.
sensuous	pertaining to the physical senses; operating through the senses	He was stimulated by the sights, sounds and smells about him; he was enjoying his sensuous experience.
sententious	terse; concise; aphoristic	After reading so many redundant speeches, I find his sententious style particulary pleasing.
sentinel	sentry; lookout	Though camped in enemy territory, Bledsoe ignored the elementary precaution of posting sentinels around the encampment.
septic	putrid; producing putrefaction	The hospital was in such a filthy state that we were afraid that many of the patients would suffer from septic poisoning.
sepulcher	tomb	Annabel Lee was buried in a sepulcher by the sea.
sequester	retire from public life; segregate; seclude	Although he had hoped for a long time to sequester himself in a small community, he never was able to drop his busy round of activities in the city.
sere	parched; dry	After the unseasonably dry winter the Berkeley hills looked dusty and sere.
serendipity	gift for finding valuable or desirable things by accident; accidental good fortune or luck	Many scientific discoveries are a matter of serendipity: Newton was not sitting there thinking about gravity when the apple dropped on his head.
serenity	calmness; placidity	The serenity of the sleepy town was shattered by a tremendous explosion.
serpentine	winding; twisting	The car swerved at every curve in the serpentine road.
serrated	having a sawtoothed edge	The beech tree is one of many plants that have serrated leaves.
servile	slavish; cringing	Constantly fawning on his employer, humble Uriah Heap was a servile creature.
servitude	slavery; compulsory labor	Born a slave, Douglass resented his wife of servitude and plotted to escape to the North.
severance	division; partition; separation	The severance of church and state is a basic principle of our government.
severity	harshness; plainness	The newspapers disapproved of the severity of the sentence.
sextant	navigation tool used to determine a ship's latitude and longitude	Given a clear night, with the aid of his sextant and compass, he could keep the ship safely on course.
shackle	chain; fetter	The criminal's ankles were shackled to prevent his escape.
sham	pretend	He shammed sickness to get out of going to school.
shambles	slaughterhouse; scene of carnage	By the time the police arrived, the room was a shambles.
shard	fragment, generally of pottery	The archaeologist assigned several students the task of reassembling earthenware vessels from the shards he had brought back from the expedition.
sheaf	bundle of stalks of grain; any bundle of things tied together	The lawyer picked up a sheaf of papers as he rose to question the witness.
sheathe	place into a case	As soon as he recognized the approaching men, he sheathed his dagger and hailed them as friends.
sherbet	flavored dessert ice	I prefer raspberry sherbet to ice cream since it is less fattening.
shimmer	glimmer intermittently	The moonlight shimmered on the water as the moon broke through the clouds for a moment.
shirk	avoid (responsibility, work, etc.); malinger	Brian has a strong sense of duty; he would never shirk any responsibility.
shoddy	sham; not genuine; inferior	You will never get the public to buy such shoddy material.
shrew	scolding woman	No one wanted to marry Shakespeare's Kate because she was a shrew.
shrewd	clever; astute	A shrewd investor, he took clever advantage of the fluctuations of the stock market.
shun	keep away from	Cherishing his solitude, the recluse shunned the company of other human beings.
shunt	turn aside; divert; sidetrack	If the switchman failed to shunt the Silver Streak onto a side track, the train would plow right into Union Station.
shyster	lawyer using questionable methods	On L.A. Law, respectable attorney Brackman was horrified to learn that his newly discovered half brother was a cheap shyster.
sibling	brother or sister	We may not enjoy being siblings, but we cannot forget that we still belong to the same family.
sibylline	prophetic; oracular	Until their destruction by fire in 83 B.C., the sibylline books were often consulted by the Romans.
sidereal	relating to the stars	Although hampered by optical and mechanical flaws, the orbiting Hubble space telescope has relayed extraordinary images of distant sidereal bodies.
silt	sediment deposited by running water	The harbor channel must be dredged annually to remove the silt.
simian	monkeylike	Lemurs are nocturnal mammals and have many simian characteristics, although they are less intelligent than monkeys.
simile	comparison of one thing with another, using the word like or as	"My love is like a red, red rose" is a simile.
simper	smirk; smile affectedly	Complimented on her appearance, Stella self-consciously simpered.
simplistic	oversimplified	Though Jack's solution dealt adequately with one aspect of the problem, it was simplistic in failing to consider various complicating factors that might arise.
simulate	feign	He simulated insanity in order to avoid punishment for his crime.
sinecure	well-paid position with little responsibility	My job is no sinecure; I work long hours and have much responsibility.
sinewy	tough; strong and firm	The steak was too sinewy to chew
singular	unique; extraordinary; odd	Though the young man tried to understand Father William's singular behavior, he still found it odd that the old man incessantly stood on his head.
sinister	evil	We must defeat the sinister forces that seek our downfall.
sinuous	winding; bending in and out; not morally honest	The snake moved in a sinuous manner.
skeptic	doubter; person who suspends judgment until he has examined the evidence supporting a	point of view. In this matter, I am a skeptic; I want proof.
skiff	small, light sailboat or rowboat	Tom dreamed of owning an ocean-going yacht but had to settle for a skiff he could sail in the bay.
skimp	provide scantily; live very economically	They were forced to skimp on necessities in order to make their limited supplies last the winter.
skinflint	miser	The old skinflint refused to give her a raise.
skirmish	minor fight	Custer's troops expected they might run into a skirmish or two on maneuvers; they did not expect to face a major battle.
skittish	lively; frisky	She is as skittish as a kitten playing with a piece of string.
skulduggery	dishonest behavior	The investigation into municipal corruption turned up new instances of skulduggery daily.
skulk	move furtively and secretly	He skulked through the less fashionable sections of the city in order to avoid meeting any of his former friends.
slacken	slow up; loosen	As they passed the finish line, the runners slackened their pace.
slag	residue from smelting metal; dross; waste matter	The blast furnace had a special opening at the bottom to allow the workers to remove the worthless slag.
slake	quench; sate	When we reached the oasis, we were able to slake our thirst.
slander	defamation; utterance of false and malicious statements	Unless you can prove your allegations, your remarks constitute slander.
slapdash	haphazard; careless; sloppy	From the number of typos and misspellings I've found on it, it's clear that Mario proofread the report in a remarkably slapdash fashion.
sleazy	flimsy; unsubstantial	This is a sleazy fabric; it will not wear well.
sleeper	something originally of little value or importance that in time becomes very valuable	Unnoticed by the critics at its publication, the eventual Pulitzer Prize winner was a classic sleeper.
sleight	dexterity	The magician amazed the audience with his sleight of hand.
slight	insult to one's dignity; snub	Hypersensitive and ready to take offense at any discourtesy, Bertha was always on the lookout for real or imaginary slights.
slither	slip or slide	During the recent ice storm, many people slithered down this hill as they walked to the station.
sloth	laziness	Such sloth in a young person is deplorable; go to work!
sloth	slow-moving tree-dwelling mammal	Note how well the somewhat greenish coat of the sloth enables it to blend in with its arboreal surroundings.
slough	cast off	Each spring, the snake sloughs off its skin.
slovenly	untidy; slipshod	Such slovenly work habits will never produce good products.
sluggard	lazy person	"You are a sluggard, a drone, a parasite," the angry father shouted at his lazy son.
sluggish	slow; lazy; lethargic	After two nights without sleep, she felt sluggish and incapable of exertion.
sluice	artificial channel for directing or controlling the flow of water	In times of drought, this sluice enables farmers to obtain water for irrigation.
slur	insult to one's character or reputation; slander	Polls revealed that the front-runner's standing had been damaged by the slurs and innuendoes circulated by his opponent's staff.
smattering	slight knowledge	I don't know whether it is better to be ignorant of a subject or to have a mere smattering of information about it.
smirk	conceited smile	Wipe that smirk off your face!
smolder	burn without flame; be liable to break out at any moment	The rags smoldered for hours before they burst into flame.
snicker	half-stifled laugh	The boy could not suppress a snicker when the teacher sat on the tack.
snivel	run at the nose; snuffle; whine	Don't you come sniveling to me complaining about your big brother.
sobriety	moderation (especially regarding indulgence in alcohol); seriousness	Neither drunkards nor comics are noted for sobriety.
sodden	soaked; dull, as if from drink	He set his sodden overcoat near the radiator to dry.
sojourn	temporary stay	After his sojourn in Florida, he began to long for the colder climate of his native New England home.
solace	comfort in trouble	I hope you will find solace in the thought that all of us share your loss.
solder	repair or make whole by using a metal alloy	The plumber fixed the leak in the pipes by soldering a couple of joints from which water had been oozing.
solecism	construction that is flagrantly incorrect grammatically	I must give this paper a failing mark because it contains many solecisms.
solemnity	seriousness; gravity	The minister was concerned that nothing should disturb the solemnity of the marriage service.
solicit	request earnestly; seek	Knowing she needed to have a solid majority for the budget to pass, the mayor telephoned all the members of the city council to solicit their votes.
solicitous	worried, concerned	The employer was very solicitous about the health of her employees as replacements were difficult to get.
soliloquy	talking to oneself	The soliloquy is a device used by the dramatist to reveal a character's innermost thoughts and emotions.
solstice	point at which the sun is farthest from the equator	The winter solstice usually occurs on December 21.
solvent	able to pay all debts	By dint of very frugal living, he was finally able to become solvent and avoid bankruptcy proceedings.
somatic	pertaining to the body; physical	Why do you ignore the spiritual aspects and emphasize only the corporeal and the somatic ones?
somber	gloomy; depressing	From the doctor's grim expression, I could tell he had somber news.
somnambulist	sleepwalker	The most famous somnambulist in literature is Lady Macbeth; her monologue in the sleepwalking scene is one of the highlights of Shakespeare's play.
somnolent	half asleep	The heavy meal and the overheated room made us all somnolent and indifferent to the speaker.
sonorous	resonant	His sonorous voice resounded through the hall.
sophist	teacher of philosophy; quibbler; employer of fallacious reasoning	You are using all the devices of a sophist in trying to prove your case; your argument is specious.
sophistication	artificiality; unnaturalness; act of employing sophistry in reasoning	Sophistication is an acquired characteristic, found more frequently among city dwellers than among residents of rural areas.
sophistry	seemingly plausible but fallacious reasoning	Instead of advancing valid arguments, he tried to overwhelm his audience with a flood of sophistries.
sophomoric	immature; shallow	Your sophomoric remarks are a sign of your youth and indicate that you have not given much thought to the problem.
soporific	sleep producing	I do not need a sedative when I listen to one of his soporific speeches.
sordid	filthy; base; vile	The social worker was angered by the sordid housing provided for the homeless.
spangle	small metallic piece sewn to clothing for ornamentation	The thousands of spangles on her dress sparkled in the glare of the stage lights.
spartan	lacking luxury and comfort; sternly disciplined	Looking over the bare, unheated room with its hard cot, he wondered what he was doing in such spartan quarters. Only his spartan sense of duty kept him at his post.
spasmodic	fitful; periodic	The spasmodic coughing in the auditorium annoyed the performers.
spat	squabble; minor dispute	What had started out as a mere spat escalated into a full-blown argument.
spate	sudden flood	I am worried about the possibility of a spate if the rains do not diminish soon.
spatial	relating to space	It is difficult to visualize the spatial extent of our universe.
spatula	broad-bladed instrument used for spreading or mixing	The manufacturers of this frying pan recommended the use of a rubber spatula to avoid scratching the specially treated surface.
spawn	lay eggs	Fish ladders had to be built in the dams to assist the salmon returning to spawn in their native streams.
specious	seemingly reasonable but incorrect	Let us not be misled by such specious arguments.
spectral	ghostly	We were frightened by the spectral glow that filled the room.
spectrum	colored band produced when a beam of light passes through a prism	The visible portion of the spectrum includes red at one end and violet at the other.
spendthrift	someone who wastes money	Easy access to credit encourages people to turn into spendthrifts who shop till they drop.  193. sphinx-like enigmatic; mysterious The Mona Lisa's sphinx-like expression has puzzled art lovers for centuries.
splice	fasten together; unite	Before you splice two strips of tape together, be sure to line them up evenly.
spontaneity	impulsiveness; absence of premeditation	What I liked best about Dale's parties was their spontaneity: a couple of friends would drop by, someone would pull out a fiddle or guitar, and before you knew it the party would be in full swing.
spoonerism	accidental transposition of sounds in sucessive words	When the radio announcer introduced the President as Hoobert Herver, he was guilty of spoonerism.
sporadic	occurring irregularly	Although there are still sporadic outbursts of shooting in the streets, the rebellion is essentially over.
sportive	playful	Such a sportive attitude is surprising in a person as serious as you usually are.
spruce	neat and trim	Every button buttoned, tie firmly in place, young Alex Keaton looked spruce and tidy for his job interview at the bank.
spry	vigorously active; nimble	She was eighty years old, yet still spry and alert.
spurious	false; counterfeit; forged; illogical	The hero of Jonathan Gash's mystery novels is an antique dealer who gives the reader advice on how to tell spurious antiques from the real things.
spurn	reject; scorn	The heroine spurned the villain's advances.
squabble	minor quarrel; bickering	Children invariably get involved in petty squabbles; wise parents know when to interfere and when to let the children work things out on their own.
squalid	dirty; neglected; poor	It is easy to see how crime can breed in such a squalid neighborhood.
squander	waste	The prodigal son squandered the family estate.
squat	stocky; short and thick	Tolkien's hobbits are somewhat squat, sturdy little creatures, fond of good ale, good music, and good food.
staccato	played in an abrupt manner; marked by abrupt, sharp sound	His staccato speech reminded one of the sound of a machine gun.
stagnant	motionless; stale; dull	The stagnant water was a breeding ground for disease
staid	sober; sedate	Her conduct during the funeral ceremony was staid and solemn.
stalemate	deadlock	Negotiations between the union and the employers have reached a stalemate; neither side is willing to budge from previously stated positions.
stalwart	strong, brawny; steadfast	His consistent support of the party has proved that he is a stalwart and loyal member.
stamina	strength; staying power	I doubt that she has the stamina to run the full distance of the marathon race.
stanch	check flow of blood	It is imperative that we stanch the gushing wound before we attend to the other injuries.
stanza	division of a poem	Do you know the last stanza of "The Star-Spangled Banner"?
static	unchanging; lacking development	Nothing had changed at home; things were static there
statute	law	We have many statutes in our law books which should be repealed.
statutory	created by statute or legislative action	The judicial courts review and try statutory crimes.
steadfast	loyal; unswerving	Penelope was steadfast in her affections, faithfully waiting for Ulysses to return from his wanderings.
stealth	slyness; sneakiness; secretiveness	Fearing detection by the sentries on duty, the scout inched his way toward the enemy camp with great stealth.
steep	soak; saturate	Be sure to steep the fabric in the dye bath for the full time prescribed.
stellar	pertaining to the stars	He was the stellar attraction of the entire performance.
stem	check the flow	The paramedic used a tourniquet to stem the bleeding from the slashed artery.
stemfrom	arise from	Milton's problems in school stemmed from his poor study habits.
stentorian	extremely loud	The town crier had stentorian voice.
stickler	perfectionist; person who insists things be exactly right	The Internal Revenue Service agent was a stickler for accuracy; no approximations or rough estimates would satisfy him.
stifle	suppress; extinguish; inhibit	Halfway through the boring lecture, Laura gave up trying to stifle her yawns.
stigma	token of disgrace; brand	I do not attach any stigma to the fact that you were accused of this crime; the fact that you were acquitted clears you completely.
stilted	bombastic; stiffly pompous	His stilted rhetoric did not impress the college audience; they were immune to bombastic utterances.
stint	be thrifty; set limits	"Spare no expense," the bride's father said, refusing to stint on the wedding arrangements.
stint	supply; allotted amount; assigned portion of work	He performed his daily stint cheerfully and willingly.
stipend	pay for services	There is a nominal stipend for this position.
stipple	paint or draw with dots	Seurat carefully stippled dabs of pure color on the canvas, juxtaposing dots of blue and yellow that the viewer's eye would interpret as green.
stipulate	make express conditions, specify	Before agreeing to reduce American military forces in Europe, the president stipulated that NATO teams be allowed to inspect Soviet bases.
stodgy	stuffy; boringly conservative	For a young person, Winston seems remarkably stodgy: you'd expect someone of his age to have a little more life.
stoic	person who is indifferent to pleasure or pain	The doctor called her patient a stoic because he had borne the pain of the examination without whimpering.
stoke	stir up a fire; feed plentifully	As a Scout, Marisa learned how to light a fire, how to stoke it if it started to die down, and how to extinguish it completely.
stolidity	dullness; impassivenss	The earthquake shattered his usual stolidity; trembling, he crouched on the no longer stable ground.
stratified	divided into classes; arranged into strata	As the economic gap between the rich and the poor increased, Roman society grew increasingly stratified.
stratum	layer of earth's surface; layer of society	Unless we alleviate conditions in the lowest stratum of our society, we may expect grumbling and revolt.
streotyped	oversimplified; lacking individuality; seen as a type	My chief objection to the book is that the characters are stereotyped; they come across as ethnic caricatures, not as real people with individual quirks, fears, and dreams.
strew	spread randomly; sprinkle; scatter	Preceding the bride to the altar, the flower girl will strew rose petals along the aisle.
striated	marked with parallel bands; grooved	The glacier left many striated rocks.
stricture	critical comments; severe and adverse criticism	His strictures on the author's style are prejudiced and unwarranted.
strident	loud and harsh	She scolded him in a strident voice
stringent	binding; rigid	I think these regulations are too stringent.
strut	pompous walk	His strut as he marched about the parade ground revealed him for what he was: a pompous buffoon.
strut	supporting bar	The engineer calculated that the strut supporting the rafter needed to be reinforced.
studied	unspontaneous; deliberate; thoughtful	Given Jill's previous slights, Jack felt that the omission of his name from the guest list was a studied insult.
stultify	cause to appear or become stupid or inconsistent; frustrate or hinder	His long hours in the blacking factory left young Dickens numb and incurious, as if the menial labor had stultified his mind.
stupefy	make numb; stun; amaze	Disapproving of drugs in general, Laura refused to take sleeping pills or any other medicine that might stupefy her.
stupor	state of apathy; daze; lack of awareness	In his stupor, the addict was unaware of the events taking place around him.
stygian	literary dark	The stygian room reminded him of an empty space.
stymie	present an obstacle; stump	The detective was stymied by the contradictory evidence in the robbery investigation.
suavity	urbanity; polish	He is particulary good in roles that require suavity and sophistication.
subaltern	subordinate	The captain treated his subalterns as though they were children rather than commissioned officers.
subjective	occurring or taking place within the mind; unreal	Your analysis is highly subjective; you have permitted your emotions and your opinions to color your thinking.
subjugate	conquer; bring under control	It is not our aim to subjugate our foe; we are interested only in establishing peaceful relations.
sublimate	refine; purify	We must strive to sublimate these desires and emotions into worthwhile activities.
sublime	exalted; noble; uplifting	Mother Teresa has been honored for her sublime deeds.
subliminal	below the threshold	We may not be aware of the subliminal influences that affect our thinking.
submissive	yielding; timid	Crushed by his authoritarian father, Will had no defiance left in him; he was totally submissive in the face of authority.
suborn	persuade to act unlawfully (especially to commit perjury)	In the Godfather, the mobsters used bribery and threats to suborn the witnesses against Don Michael Corleone.
subpoena	writ summoning a witness to appear	The prosecutor's office was ready to serve a subpoena on the reluctant witness.
subsequent	following; later	In subsequent lessons, we shall take up more difficult problems.
subservient	behaving like a slave; servile; obsequious	He was proud and dignified; he refused to be subservient to anyone.
subside	settle down; descend; grow quiet	The doctor assured us that the fever would eventually subside.
subsidiary	subordinate; secondary	This information may be used as subsidiary evidence but is not sufficient by itself to prove your argument.
subsidy	direct financial aid by government, etc	Without this subsidy, American ship operators would not be able to compete in world markets.
subsistence	existence; means of support; livelihood	In those days of inflated prices, my salary provided mere subsistence.
substantiate	verify; support	I intend to substantiate my statement by producing witnesses.
substantive	essential; pertaining to the substance	Although the delegates were aware of the importance of the problem, they could not agree on the substantive issues.
subsume	include; encompass	Does the general theory of relativity contradict Newtonian physics, or is Newton's law of gravity subsumed into Einstein's larger scheme?
subterfuge	pretense; evasion	As soon as we realized that you had won our support by a subterfuge we withdrew our endorsement of your candidacy.
subtlety	nicety; cunning; guile; delicacy	The subtlety of his remarks was unnoticed by most of his audience.
subversive	tending to overthrow; destructive	At first glance, the notion that Styrofoam cups may actually be more ecologically sound than paper cups strikes most environmentalists as subversive.
succinct	brief; terse; compact	His remarks are always succinct and pointed.
succor	aid; assistance; relief	We shall be ever grateful for the succor our country gave us when we were in need.
succulent	juicy; full of richness	To some people, Florida citrus fruits are more succulent than those from California.
succumb	yield; give in; die	I succumb to temptation whenever it comes my way.
suffragist	advocate of voting rights (for women)	In recognition of her efforts to win the vote for women, Congress authorized coining a silver dollar honoring the suffragist Susan B. Anthony.
suffuse	spread over	A blush suffused her cheeks when we teased her about her love affair.
sully	tarnish; soil	He felt that it was beneath his dignity to sully his hands in such menial labor.
sultry	sweltering	He could not adjust himself to the sultry climate of the tropics.
summation	act of finding the total, summary	In his summation, the lawyer emphasized the testimony given by the two witnesses.
sumptuous	lavish; rich	I cannot recall when I have had such a sumptuous Thanksgiving feast.
sunder	separate; part	Northern and southern Ireland are politically and religiously sundered.
sundry	various; several	My suspicions were aroused when I read sundry items in the newspapers about your behavior.
superannuated	retired or disqualified because of age	The superannuated man was indignant because he felt that he could still perform a good day's work.
supercilious	contemptuous; haughty	I prefer Jill's modesty to Jack's supercilious and arrogant attitude.
supererogatory	superfluous; more than needed or demanded	We have more than enough witnesses to corroborate your statement; to present any more would be supererogatory.
superficial	trivial; shallow	Since your report gave only a superficial analysis of the problem, I cannot give you more than a passing grade.
superfluous	excessive; overabundant, unnecessary	Please try not to include so many superfluous details in your report; just give me the bare facts.
superimpose	place over something else	Your attempt to superimpose another agency in this field will merely increase the bureaucratic nature of our government.
supernumerary	person or thing in excess of what is necessary; extra	His first appearance on the stage was as a supernumerary in a Shakespearean tragedy.
supersede	cause to be set aside; replace	This regulation will supersede all previous rules.
supine	lying on back	The defeated pugilist lay supine on the canvas.
supplant	replace; usurp	Corazon Aquino supplanted Ferdinand Marcos as president of the Philippines.
supple	flexible; pliant	The angler found a supple limb and used it as a fishing rod.
suppliant	entreating; beseeching	He could not resist the dog's suppliant whimpering, and he gave it some food.
supplicate	petition humbly; pray to grant a favor	We supplicate Your Majesty to grant him amnesty.
supposition	hypothesis; surmise	I based my decision to confide in him on the supposition that he would be discreet.
supposititious	assumed; counterfeit; hypothetical	I find no similarity between your supposititious illustration and the problem we are facing.
surfeit	satiate; stuff; indulge to excess in anything	Every Thanksgiving we are surfeited with an overabundance of holiday treats.
surly	rude; cross	Because of his surly attitude, many people avoided his company.
surmise	guess	I surmise that he will be late for this meeting.
surmount	overcome	He had to surmount many obstacles in order to succeed.
surpass	exceed	Her SAT scores surpassed out expectations.
surreptitious	secret	News of their surreptitious meeting gradually leaked out.
surrogate	substitute	For a fatherless child, a male teacher may become a father surrogate.
surveillance	watching; guarding	The FBI kept the house under constant surveillance in the hope of capturing all the criminals at one time.
susceptible	impressionable; easily influenced; having little resistance, as to a disease	He was a very susceptible young man, and so his parents worried that he might fall into bad company.
sustain	experience; support; nourish	He sustained such a severe injury that the doctors feared he would be unable to work to sustain his growing family.
sustenance	means of support, food, nourishment	In the tropics, the natives find sustenance easy to obtain because of all the fruit trees.
suture	stitches sewn to hold the cut edges of a wound or incision; material used in sewing	We will remove the sutures as soon as the wound heals.
swarthy	dark; dusky	Despite the stereotype, not all Italians are swarthy; many are fair and blond.
swathe	wrap around; bandage	When I visited him in the hospital, I found him swathed in bandages.
swelter	be oppressed by heat	I am going to buy an air conditioning unit for my apartment as I do not intend to swelter through another hot and humid summer.
swerve	deviate; turn aside sharply	The car swerved wildly as the driver struggled to regain control of the wheel.
swill	drink greedily	Singing, "Yo, ho, ho, and a bottle of rum," Long John Silver and his fellow pirates swilled their grog.
swindler	cheat	She was gullible and trusting, an easy victim for the first swindler who came along.
sybarite	lover of luxury	Rich people are not always sybarites; some of them have little taste for a life of luxury.
sycophant	servile flatterer	The king enjoyed the servile compliments and attentions of the sycophants in his retinue.
syllogism	logical formula consisting of a major premise, a minor premise and a conclusion; deceptive	or specious argument There must be a fallacy in this syllogism; I cannot accept its conclusion.
sylvan	pertaining to the woods; rustic	His paintings of nymphs in sylvan backgrounds were criticized as oversentimental.
symbiosis	interdependent relationship (between groups, species), often mutually beneficial	Both the crocodile bird and the crocodile derive benefit from their symbiosis; pecking away at food particles embedded in the crocodile's teeth, the bird derives nourishment; the crocodile, meanwhile, derives proper dental hygiene.
symmetry	arrangement of parts so that balance is obtained; congruity	The addition of a second tower will give this edifice the symmetry that it now lacks.
synchronous	similary timed; simultaneous with	We have many examples of scientists in different parts of the world who have made synchronous discoveries.
synoptic	providing a general overview; summary	The professor turned to the latest issue of Dissertation Abstracts for a synoptic account of what was new in the field.
synthesis	combining parts into a whole	Now that we have succeeded in isolating this drug, our next problem is to plan its synthesis in the laboratory.
synthetic	artificial; resulting from synthesis	During the twentieth century, many synthetic products have replaced the natural products.
tacit	understood; not put into words	We have a tacit agreement based on only a handshake.
taciturn	habitually silent; talking a little	New Englanders are reputedly taciturn people.
tactile	pertaining to the organs or sense of touch	His callused hands had lost their tactile sensitivity.
tainted	contaminated; corrupt	Health authorities are always trying to prevent the sale and use of tainted food.
talisman	charm	She wore the talisman to ward off evil.
talon	claw of bird	The falconer wore a leather gauntlet to avoid being clawed by the hawk's talons.
tangential	peripheral; only slightly connected; digressing	Despite Clark's attempts to distract her with tangential remarks, Lois kept on coming back to her main question: why couldn't he come out to dinner with Superman and her?
tangible	able to be touched; real; palpable	Although Tom did not own a house, he had several tangible assets--a car, a television, a PC--that he could sell if he needed cash.
tanner	person who turns animal hides into leather	Using a solution of tanbark, the tanner treated the cowhide, transforming it into supple leather.
tantalize	tease; torture with disappointment	Tom loved to tantalize his younger brother with candy; he knew the boy was forbidden to have it.
tantamount	equal	Your ignoring their pathetic condition is tantamount to the murder.
tantrum	fit of petulance; caprice	The child learned that he could have almost anything if he went into tantrums.
taper	candle	He lit the taper on the windowsill.
tarantula	venomous spider	We need an antitoxin to counteract the bite of the tarantula.
tarry	delay; dawdle	We can't tarry if we want to get to the airport on time.
taut	tight; ready	The captain maintained that he ran a taut ship.
tautological	needlessly repetitious	In the sentence "It was visible to the eye," the phrase "to the eye" is tautological.
tawdry	cheap and gaudy	He won a few tawdry trinkets in Coney Island.
taxonomist	specialist in classifying (animals, etc.)	Dental patterns often enable the taxonomist to distinguish members of one rodent species from those of another.
tedium	boredom; weariness	We hope this radio will help overcome the tedium of your stay in the hospital.
temerity	boldness; rashness	Do you have the temerity to argue with me?
temper	moderate; tone down or restrain; toughen (steel)	Not even her supervisor's grumpiness could temper Nancy's enthusiasm for her new job.
temperament	characteristic frame of mind; disposition; emotional excess	Although the twins look alike, they differ markedly in temperament: Tod is calm, but Rod is excitable.
temperate	restrained; self-controlled	Noted for his temperate appetite, he seldom gained weight.
tempo	speed of music	I find the conductor's tempo too slow for such a brilliant piece of music.
temporal	not lasting forever; limited by time; secular	At one time in our history, temporal rulers assumed that they had been given their thrones by divine right.
temporize	avoid committing oneself; gain time	I cannot permit you to temporize any longer; I must have a definite answer today.
tenacious	holding fast	I had to struggle to break his tenacious hold on my arm.
tenacity	firmness; persistency; adhesiveness	It is extremely difficult to overcome the tenacity of a habit such as smoking.
tendentious	having an aim; biased; designed to further a cause	The editorials in this periodical are tendentious rather than truth-seeking.
tender	offer; extend	Although no formal changes had been made against him, in the wake of the recent scandal the mayor felt he should tender his resignation.
tenet	doctrine; dogma	The agnostic did not accept the tenets of their faith.
tensile	capable of being stretched	Mountain climbers must know the tensile strength of their ropes.
tentative	provisional; experimental	Your tentative plans sound plausible; let me know when the final details are worked out.
tenuous	thin; rare; slim	The allegiance of our allies is held by rather tenuous ties; let us hope they will remain loyal.
tenure	holding of an office; time during which such an office is held	He was permanent tenure in this position and cannot be fired.
tepid	lukewarm	During the summer, I like to take a tepid bath, not a hot one.
terminate	to bring to an end	When his contract was terminated unexpectedly, he desperately needed a new job.
terminology	terms used in a science or art	The special terminology developed by some authorities in the field has done more to confuse laypersons than to enlighten them.
terminus	last stop of railroad	After we reached the railroad terminus, we continued our journey into the wilderness on saddle horses.
terrestrial	on or relating to the earth	We have been able to explore the terrestrial regions much more thoroughly than the aquatic or celestial regions.
terse	concise; abrupt; pithy	I admire his terse style of writing; he comes directly to the point.
tertiary	third	He is so thorough that he analyzes tertiary causes where other writers are content with primary and secondary reasons.
tesselated	inlaid; mosaic	I recall seeing a table with a tesselated top of bits of stone and glass in a very interesting pattern.
testator	maker of a will	The attorney called in his secretary and his partner to witness the signature of the testator.
testy	irritable; short-tempered	My advice is to avoid discussing this problem with him today as he is rather testy and may shout at you.
tether	tie with a rope	Before we went to sleep, we tethered the horses to prevent their wandering off during the night.
thematic	relating to a unifying motif or idea	Those who think of Moby Dick as a simple adventure story about whaling miss is underlying thematic import.
theocracy	government of a community by religious leaders	Some Pilgrims favored the establishment of a theocracy in New England.
theoretical	not practical or applied; hypothetical	Bob was better at applied engineering and computer programming than he was at theoretical physics and math. While I can still think of some theoretical objections to your plan, you've convinced me of its basic soundness.
therapeutic	curative	Now better known for its racetrack, Saratoga Springs first gained attention for the therapeutic qualities of its famous "healing waters".
thermal	pertaining to heat	The natives discovered that the host springs gave excellent thermal baths and began to develop their community as a health resort.
thespian	pertaining to drama	Her success in the school play convinced her she was destined for a thespian career.
thrall	slave; bondage	The captured soldier was held in thrall by the conquering army.
thrifty	careful about money; economical	A thrifty shopper compares prices before making major purchases.
thrive	prosper; flourish	Despite the impact of recession on the restaurant trade, Philip's cafe thrived.
throes	violent anguish	The throes of despair can be as devastating as the spasms accompanying physical pain.
throng	crowd	Throngs of shoppers jammed the aisles.
throttle	strangle	The criminal tried to throttle the old man with his bare hands.
thwart	baffle; frustrate	He felt that everyone was trying to thwart his plans and prevent his success.
tightwad	excessively frugal person; miser	Jill called Jack a tightwad because he never picked up the check.
tilter	handle used to move the boat's rudder (to steer)	Fearing the wind might shift suddenly and capsize the skiff, Tom kept one hand on the tilter at all times.
timbre	quality of a musical tone produced by a musical instrument	We identify the instrument producing a musical sound by its timbre.
timid	easily frightened; apprehensive	He was timid and cowardish; always backing up at daunting situations.
timidity	lack of self-confidence or courage	If you are to succeed as a salesperson, you must first lose your timidity and fear of failure.
timorous	fearful; demonstrating fear	His timorous manner betrayed the fear he felt at the moment.
tipple	drink (alcoholic beverages) frequently	He found that his most enjoyable evenings occurred when he tippled with his friends at the local pub.
tirade	extended scolding; denunciation	Long before he had finished his tirade, we were sufficiently aware of the seriousness of our misconduct.
titanic	gigantic	titanic waves beat aginst the shore during the hurricane.
tithe	tax of one-tenth	Because he was an agnostic, he refused to pay his tithes to the clergy.
titillate	tickle	I am here not to titillate my audience but to enlighten it.
title	right or claim to possession; mark of rank; name (of a book, film, etc.)	Though the penniless Duke of Ragwort no longer held title to the family estate, he still retained his title as head of one of England's oldest families.
titter	nervous laugh	Her aunt's constant titter nearly drove her mad.
titular	having the title of an office without the obligations	Although he was the titular head of the company, the real decisions were made by his general manager.
toady	servile flatterer; yes man	Never tell the boss anything he doesn't wish to hear: he doesn't want an independent adviser, he just wants a toady.
toga	Roman outer robe	Marc Antony pointed to the slashes in Caesar's toga.
toil	work laboriously; make slow painful progress	You must toil through 3500 words list in order to achieve a high score on GRE.
tome	large volume	He spent much time in the libraries poring over ancient tomes.
tonic	invigorating medicine	The tonic water invigorated her, contrary to the enervating effect of the alcohol.
tonsure	shaving of the head, especially by person entering religious orders	His tonsure, even more than his monastic garb, indicated that he was a member of the religious order.
topography	physical features of a region	Before the generals gave the order to attack, they ordered a complete study of the topography of the region.
torpor	lethargy; sluggishness; dormancy	Nothing seemed to arouse him from his torpor; he had wholly surrendered himself to lethargy.
torque	twisting force; force producing rotation	With her wrench she applied sufficient torque to the nut the loosen it.
torrent	rushing stream; flood	Day after day of heavy rain saturated the hillside until the water ran downhill in torrents.
torso	trunk of statue with head and limbs missing; human trunk	This torso, found in the ruins of Pompeii, is now on exhibition in the museum in Naples.
tortuous	winding; full of curves	Because this road is so tortuous, it is unwise to go faster than twenty miles an hour on it.
touchstone	stone used to test the fineness of gold alloys; criterion	What touchstone can be used to measure the character of a person?
touchy	sensitive; irascible	Do not discuss this phase of the problem as he is very touchy about it.
tout	publicize; praise excessively	I lost confidence in my broker after he touted some junk bonds that turned out to be a bad investment.
toxic	poisonous	We must seek an antidote for whatever toxic substance he has eaten.
tract	pamphlet; a region of indefinite size	The King granted William Penn a tract of land in the New World.
tractable	docile	You will find the children in this school very tractable and willing to learn.
traduce	expose to slander	His opponents tried to traduce the candidate's reputation by spreading rumors about his past.
trajectory	path taken by a projectile	The police tried to locate the spot from which the assassin had fired the fatal shot by tracing the trajectory of the bullet.
tranquillity	calmness; peace	After the commotion and excitement of the city, I appreciate the tranquillity of these fields and forests.
transcend	exceed; surpass	This accomplishment transcends all our previous efforts.
transcribe	copy	When you transcribe your notes, please send a copy to Mr.Smith and keep the original for our files.
transgression	violation of a law; sin	Forgive us our transgressions; we know not what we do.
transient	momentary; temporary; staying for a short time	Lexy's joy at finding the perfect Christmas gift for Phil was transient; she still had to find presents for the cousins and Uncle Bob. Located near the airport, this hotel caters to the largely transient trade.
transition	going from one state of action to another	During the period of transition from oil heat to gas heat, the furnace will have to be shut off.
transitoriness	impermanence	Conscious that all things pass, the psalmist relates the transitoriness of happiness and fame.
translucent	partly transparent	We could not recognize the people in the next room because of the translucent curtains that separated us.
transmute	change; convert to something different	He was unable to transmute his dreams into actualities.
transparent	permitting to light to pass through freely; easily detected	Your scheme is so transparent that it will fool no one.
transpire	be revealed; happen	When Austen writes the sentence "It had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him," her meaning is not that the debts had just been incurred, but the the shocking news had just leaked out.
transport	strong emotion	Margo was a creature of extremes, at one moment in transports of joy over a vivid sunset, at another moment in transports of grief over a dying bird.
trappings	outward decorations; ornaments	He loved the trappings of success: the limousines, the stock options, the company jet.
traumatic	pertaining to an injury caused by violence	In his nightmares, he kept on recalling the traumatic experience of being wounded in battle.
travail	painful labor	How long do you think a man can endure such travail and degradation without rebelling?
traverse	go through or across	When you traverse this field, be careful of the bull.
travesty	comical parody; treatment aimed at making something appear ridiculous	The ridiculous decision the jury has arrived at is a travesty of justice.
treatise	article treating a subject systematically and thoroughly	He is preparing a treatise on the Elizabethan playwrights for his graduate degree.
trek	travel; journey	The tribe made their trek further north that summer in search of game.
tremor	trembling; slight quiver	She had a nervous tremor in her right hand.
tremulous	trembling; wavering	She was tremulous more from excitement than from fear.
trenchant	cutting; keen	I am afraid of his trenchant wit for it is so often sarcastic.
trepidation	fear; trembling agitation	We must face the enemy without trepidation if we are to win this battle.
tribulation	distress; suffering	After all the trials and tribulations we have gone through, we need this rest.
tribunal	court of justice	The decision of the tribunal was final and the prisoner was sentenced to death.
tribute	tax levied by a ruler; mark of respect	The colonists refused to pay tribute to a foreign despot.
trident	three-pronged spear	Neptune is usually depicted as rising from the sea, carrying his trident on his shoulder.
trigger	set off	John is touchy today; say one word wrong and you'll trigger an explosion.
trilogy	group of three works	Romain Rolland's novel Jean Christophe was first published as a trilogy.
trinket	knickknack; bauble	Whenever she traveled abroad, Ethel would pick up costume jewelry and other trinkets as souvenirs.
trite	hackneyed; commonplace	Thr trite and predictable situations in many television programs alienate many viewers.
trivia	trifles; unimportant matters	Too many magazines ignore newsworthy subjects and feature trivia.
troth	pledge of good faith especially in betrothal	He gave her his troth and vowed to cherish her always.
trough	container for feeding farm animals; lowest point (of a wave, business cycle, etc.)	The hungry pigs struggled to get at the fresh swill in the trough. The surfer rode her board, coasting along in the trough between two waves.
truculence	agressiveness; ferocity	Tynan's reviews were noted for their caustic attacks and general tone of truculence.
truism	self-evident truth	Many a truism is well expressed in a proverb.
truncate	cut the top off	The top of the cone that has been truncated in a plane parallel to its base is a circle.
tryst	meeting	The lovers kept their tryst even though they realized their danger.
tumid	swollen; pompous; bombastic	I especially dislike his tumid style; I prefer writing which is less swollen and bombastic.
tumult	commotion; riot; noise	She could not make herself heard over the tumult of the mob.
tundra	rolling, treeless plain in Siberia and arctic North America	Despite the cold, many geologists are trying to discover valuable mineral deposits in the tundra.
turbid	muddy; having the sediment disturbed	The water was turbid after the children had waded through it.
turbulence	state of violent agitation	We were frightened by the turbulence of the ocean during the storm.
tureen	deep dish for serving soup	The waiters brought the soup to the tables in silver tureens.
turgid	swollen; distended	The turgid river threatened to overflow the levees and flood the contryside.
turmoil	confusion; strife	Conscious he had sinned, he was in a state of spiritual turmoil.
turncoat	traitor	The British considered Benedict Arnold a loyalist; the Americans considered him a turncoat.
turpitude	depravity	A visitor may be denied admittance to this country if she has been guilty of moral turpitude.
tutelage	guardianship; training	Under the tutelage of such masters of the instrument, she made rapid progress as a virtuoso.
tutelary	protective; pertaining to a guardianship	I am acting in my tutelary capacity when I refuse to grant you permission to leave the campus.
tycoon	wealthy leader	John D. Rockefeller was a prominent tycoon.
tyranny	oppression; cruel government	Frederick Douglass fought against the tyranny of slavery throughout his entire life.
tyro	beginner; novice	For a mere tyro, you have produced some marvelous results.
ubiquitous	being everywhere; omnipresent	That Christmas "The Little Drummer Boy" seemed ubiquitous: Justin heard the tune everywhere he went.
ulterior	situated beyond; unstated and often questionable	You must have an ulterior motive for your behavior, since there is no obvious reason for it.
ultimate	final; not susceptible to further analysis	Scientists are searching for the ultimate truths.
ultimatum	last demand; warning	Since they have ignored our ultimatum, our only recourse is to declare war.
umbrage	resentment; anger; sense of injury or insult	She took umbrage at his remarks and stormed away in a huff.
unanimity	complete agreement	We were surprised by the unanimity with which our proposals were accepted by the different groups.
unassuaged	unsatisfied; not soothed	Her anger is unassuaged by your apology.
unassuming	modest	He is so unassuming that some people fail to realize how great a man he really is.
unbridled	violent	She had a sudden fit of unbridled rage.
uncanny	strange; mysterious	You have the uncanny knack of reading my innermost thoughts.
unconscionable	unscrupulous; excessive	She found the load shark's demands unconscionable and impossible to meet.
uncouth	outlandish; clumsy; boorish	Most biographers portray Lincoln as an uncouth and ungainly young man.
unction	the act of anointing with oil	The anointing with oil of a person near death is called extreme unction.
unctous	oily; bland; insincerely suave	Uriah Heep disguised his nefarious actions by unctuous protestations of his "'umility".
undergird	strengthen the base of	Whereas relativity theory undermined the Newtonian mechanics, cosmology was undergirded by it.
undermine	weaken; sap	The recent corruption scandals have undermined many people's faith in the city government.
underscore	emphasize	Adressing the jogging class, Kim underscored the importance to runners of good nutrition.
undulate	move with a wavelike motion	The flag undulated in the breeze.
unearth	dig up	When they unearthed the city, the archeologists found many relics of an ancient civilization.
unearthly	not earthly; weird	There is an unearthly atmosphere in her work that amazes the casual observer.
unequivocal	plain; obvious	My answer to your proposal is an unequivocal and absolute "No".
unerringly	infallibly	My teacher unerringly pounced on the one typographical error in my essay.
unfaltering	steadfast	She approached the guillotine with unfaltering steps.
unfeigned	genuine; real	She turned so pale that I am sure her surprise was unfeigned.
unfettered	liberated; freed from chains	Chained to the wall for months on end, the hostage despaired that he would ever be unfettered.
unfledged	immature	It is hard for an unfledged writer to find a sympathetic publisher.
unfrock	to strip a priest or minister of church authority	To disbar a lawyer, to unfrock a priest, to suspend a doctor's license to practice--these are extreme steps that the authorities should take only after careful consideration.
ungainly	awkward	He is an ungainly young man; he trips over everything.
unguent	ointment	Apply this unguent to the sore muscles before retiring.
uniformity	sameness; consistency; monotony	After a while, the uniformity of TV situation comedies becomes boring.
unilateral	one-sided	This legislation is unilateral since it binds only one party in the controversy.
unimpeachable	blameless and exemplary	Her conduct in office was unimpeachable and her record is spotless.
uninhibited	unrepressed	The congregation was shocked by her uninhibited laughter during the sermon.
unintimidating	unfrightening	Though Phil had expected to feel overawed when he met Joe Montana, he found the experience unintimidating and relaxing.
unique	without an equal; single in kind	You have the unique distinction of being the first student whom I have had to fail in this course.
unison	unity of pitch; complete accord	The choir sang in unison.
universal	characterizing or affecting all; present everywhere	At first, no one shared Christopher's opinions; his theory that the world was round was met with universal disdain.
unkempt	disheveled; with uncared-for appearance	The beggar was dirty and unkempt.
unobtrusive	inconspicuous; not blatant	The secret service agents in charge of protecting the President tried to be as unobtrusive as possible.
unprecedented	novel; unparalleled	Margaret Mitchell's book Gone with the Wind was an unprecedented success.
unprepossessing	unattractive	During adolescence many attractive young people somehow acquire the false notion that their appearance is unprepossessing.
unravel	disentangle; solve	With equal ease Miss Marple unraveled tangled balls of yarn and baffling murder mysteries.
unrequited	not reciprocated	Suffering the pangs of unrequited love, Olivia rebukes Cesario for his hard-heartedness.
unruly	disobedient; lawless	The only way to curb this unruly mob is to use tear gas.
unsavory	distasteful; morally offensive	People with unsavory reputations should not be allowed to work with young children.
unscathed	unharmed	They prayed he would come back from the war unscathed.
unseemly	unbecoming; indecent	Your levity is unseemly at this time of mourning.
unsightly	ugly	Although James was an experienced emergency room nurse, he occasionally became queasy when faced with a particularly unsightly injury.
unsullied	untarnished	I am happy that my reputation is unsullied.
untenable	unsupportable	I find your theory untenable and must reject it.
untoward	unfortunate; annoying	Untoward circumstances prevent me from being with you on this festive occasion.
unwarranted	unjustified; groundless; undeserved	We could not understand Martin's unwarranted rudeness to his mother's guests.
unwieldy	awkward; cumbersome; unmanageable	The large carton was so unwieldy that the movers had trouble getting it up the stairs.
unwitting	unintentional; not knowing	She was the unwitting tool of the swindlers
unwonted	unaccustomed	He hesitated to assume the unwonted role of master of ceremonies at the dinner.
upbraid	scold; reproach	I must upbraid him for his unruly behavior.
uproarious	marked by commotion; extremely funny; very noisy	The uproarious comedy hit Home Alone featured Macaulay Culkin, whose mugging and comic antics provoked gales of uproarious laughter from audiences coast to coast.
upshot	outcome	The upshot of the rematch was that the former champion proved that he still possessed all the skills of his youth.
urbane	suave; refined; elegant	The courtier was urbane and sophisticated
urchin	mischievous child (usually a boy)	Get out! This store is no place for grubby urchins!
ursine	bearlike; pertaining to a bear	Because of its ursine appearance, the great panda has been identified with the bears; actually, it is closely related to the raccoon.
usurp	seize power; supplant	The revolution ended when the victorious rebel leader usurped the throne.
usury	lending money at illegal rates of interest	The loan shark was found guilty of usury.
utopia	imaginary land with perfect social and political system	Shangri-la was the name of James Hilton's Tibetan utopia.
uxorious	excessively devoted to one's wife	His friends laughed at him because he was so uxorious and submissive to his wife's desires.
vacillate	waver; fluctuate	Uncertain which suitor she ought to marry, the princess vacillated, saying now one, now the other.
vacuous	empty; lacking in ideas; stupid	The candidate's vacuous remarks annoyed the audience, who had hoped to hear more than empty platitudes
vagabond	wanderer; tramp	In summer, college students wander the roads of Europe like carefree vagabonds.
vagary	caprice; whim	She followed every vagary of fashion.
vagrant	homeless wanderer	Because he was a stranger in town with no visible means of support, Martin feared he would be jailed as a vagrant.
vagrant	stray; random	He tried to study, but could not collect his vagrant thoughts.
vainglorious	boastful; excessively conceited	She was a vainglorious and arrogant individual.
valedictory	pertaining to farewell	I found the valedictory address too long; leave-taking should be brief.
valid	logically convincing; sound; legally acceptable	You're going to have to come up with a better argument if you want to convince me that your reasoning is valid.
validate	confirm; ratify	I will not publish my findings until I validate my results.
valor	bravery	He received the Medal of Honor for his valor in battle.
vampire	ghostly being that sucks the blood of the living	Children were afraid to go to sleep at night because of the many legends of vampires.
vanguard	forerunners; advance forces	We are the vanguard of a tremendous army that is following us.
vantage	position giving an advantage	They fired upon the enemy from behind trees, walls and any other point of vantage they could find.
vapid	insipid; inane	She delivered an uninspired and vapid address.
variegated	many-colored	Without her glasses, Gretchen saw the fields of tulips as a variegated blur.
vassal	in feudalism, one who held land of a superior lord	The lord demanded that his vassals contribute more to his military campaign.
vaunted	boasted; bragged; highly publicized	This much vaunted project proved a disappointment when it collapsed.
veer	change in direction	After what seemed an eternity, the wind veered to the east and the storm abated.
vegetate	live in a monotonous way	I do not understand how you can vegetate in this quiet village after the adventurous life you have led.
vehement	impetuous; with marked vigor	He spoke with vehement eloquence in defense of his client.
velocity	speed	The train went by at considerable velocity.
venal	capable of being bribed	The venal policeman accepted the bribe offered him by the speeding motorist whom he had stopped.
vendetta	blood feud	The rival mobs engaged in a bitter vendetta.
vendor	seller	The fruit vendor sold her wares from a stall on the sidewalk.
veneer	thin layer; cover	Casual acquaintances were deceived by his veneer of sophistication and failed to recognize his fundamental shallowness.
venerable	deserving high respect	We do not mean to be disrespectful when we refuse to follow the advice of our venerable leader.
venerate	revere	In China, the people venerate their ancestors.
venial	forgivable; trivial	We may regard a hugry man's stealing as a venial crime.
venison	the meat of a deer	The hunters dined on venison.
vent	express; utter	He vented his wrath on his class.
vent	small opening; outlet	The wine did not flow because the air vent in the barrel was clogged.
ventral	abdominal	We shall now examine the ventral plates of this serpent, not the dorsal side.
ventriloquist	someone who can make his or her voice seem to come from another person or thing	This ventriloquist does an act in which she has a conversation with a wooden dummy.
venturesome	bold	A group of venturesome women were the first to scale Mt.Annapurna.
venue	location	The attorney asked for a change of venue; he thought his client would do better if the trial were held in a less conservative county.
veracious	truthful	I can recommend him for this position because I have always found him veracious and reliable.
veracity	truthfulness	Trying to prove Hill a liar, Senator Spector repeatedly questioned her veracity.
verbalize	put into words	I know you don't like to talk about these things, but please try to verbalize your feelings.
verbatim	word for word	He repeated the message verbatim.
verbiage	pompous array of words	After we had waded through all the verbiage, we discovered that the writer had said very little.
verbose	wordy	This article is too verbose; we must edit it.
verdant	green; lush in vegetation	Monet's paintings of the verdant meadows were symphonies in green.
verdigris	green coating on copper which has been exposed to the weather	Despite all attempts to protect the statue from the elements, it became coated with verdigris.
verge	border; edge	Madame Curie knew she was on the verge of discovering the secrets of radioactive elements.
verisimilitude	appearance of truth; likelihood	Critics praised her for the verisimilitude of her performance as Lady Macbeth. She was completely believable.
verity	truth; reality	The four verities were revealed to Buddha during his long meditation.
vernacular	living language; natural style	Cut out those old-fashioned "thee's" and "thou's" and write in the vernacular.
vernal	pertaining to spring	We may expect vernal showers all during the month of April.
versatile	having many talents; capable of working in many fields	He was a versatile athlete; at college he had earned varsity letters in baseball, football, and track.
vertex	summit	Let us drop a perpendicular line from the vertex of the triangle to the base.
vertigo	dizziness	We test potential plane pilots for susceptibility to spells of vertigo.
verve	enthusiasm; liveliness	She approached her studies with such verve that it was impossible for her to do poorly.
vestige	trace; remains	We discovered vestiges of early Indian life in the cave.
vex	annoy; distress	Please try not to vex your mother; she is doing the best she can.
viable	capable of maintaining life; practicable; workable	The infant, though prematurely born, is viable and has a good chance to survive.
viand	food	There was a variety of viands at the feast.
vicarious	acting as a substitute; done by a deputy	Many people get a vicarious thrill at the movies by imagining they are the characters on the screen.
vicissitude	change of fortune	Humbled by life's vicissitudes, the last emperor of China worked as a lowly gardener in the palace over which he had once ruled.
victuals	food	I am very happy to be able to provide you with these victuals; I know you are hungry.
vie	contend; compete	Politicians vie with one another, competing for donations and votes.
vigilance	watchfulness	Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty.
vignette	picture; short literary sketch	The New Yorker published her latest vignette.
vigor	active strength	Although he was over seventy years old, Jack had the vigor of a man in his prime.
vilify	slander	She is a liar and is always trying to vilify my reputation.
vindicate	clear of charges	I hope to vindicate my client and return him to society as a free man.
vindictive	revengeful	She was very vindictive and never forgave an injury.
vintner	winemaker; seller of wine	The poet wondered what the vintners could buy that would be half as precious as the wine they sold.
viper	poisonous snake	The habitat of the horned viper, a particularly venomous snake, is in sandy regions like the Sahara or the Sinai peninsula.
virile	manly	I do not accept the premise that a man is virile only when he is belligerent.
virtual	in essence; for practical purposes	She is a virtual financial wizard when it comes to money matters.
virtue	goodness; moral excellence; good quality	A virtue carried to extremes can turn into something resembling vice; humility, for example, can degenerate into servility and spinelessness.
virtuoso	highly skilled artist	The child prodigy Yehudi Menuhin grew into a virtuoso whose virtuosity on the violin thrilled millions.
virulent	extremely poisonous	The virus is highly virulent and has made many of us ill for days.
virus	disease communicator	The doctors are looking for a specific medicine to control this virus.
visage	face; appearance	The stern visage of the judge indicated that she had decided to impose a severe penalty.
visceral	felt in one's inner organs	She disliked the visceral sensations she had whenever she rode the roller coaster.
viscid	adhesive; gluey	The trunk of the maple tree was viscid with sap.
viscous	sticky, gluey	Melted tar is a viscous substance.
vise	tool for holding work in place	Before filling its edges, the keysmith took the blank key and fixed it firmly between the jaws of a vise.
visionary	produced by imagination; fanciful; mystical	She was given to visionary schemes that never materialized.
vital	vibrant and lively; critical; living, breathing	The vital, highly energetic first aid instructor stressed that it was vital in examining accident victims to note their vital signs.
vitiate	spoil the effect of; make inoperative	Fraud will vitiate the contract.
vitreous	pertaining to or resembling glass	Although this plastic has many vitreous qualties such as transparency, it is unbreakable.
vitriolic	corrosive; sarcastic	Such vitriolic criticism is uncalled for.
vituperative	abusive; scolding	He became more vituperative as he realized that we were not going to grant him his wish.
vivacious	lively or animated; sprightly	She had always been vivacious and sparkling.
vivisection	act of dissecting living animals	The Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals opposed vivisection and deplored the practice of using animals in scientific experiments.
vixen	female fox; ill-tempered woman	Aware that she was right once again, he lost his temper and called her a shrew and a vixen.
vociferous	clamorous; noisy	The crowd grew vociferous in its anger and threatened to take the law into its own hands.
vogue	popular fashion	Jeans became the vogue on many college campuses.
volatile	changeable; explosive; evaporating rapidly	The political climate today is extremely volatile: no one can predict what the electorate will do next.
volition	act of making a conscious choice	She selected this dress of her own volition.
voluble	fluent; glib	She was a voluble speaker, always ready to talk.
voluminous	bulky; large	Despite her family burdens, she kept up a voluminous correspondence with her friends.
voluptuous	gratifying the senses	The nobility during the Renaissance led voluptuous lives.
voracious	ravenous	The wolf is a voracious animal, its hunger never satisfied.
vortex	whirlwind; whirlpool; center of turbulence; predicament into which one is inexorably plunged	Sucked into the vortex of the tornado, Dorothy and Toto were carried from Kansas to Oz.
vouchsafe	grant condescendingly; guarantee	I can safely vouchsafe you fair return on your investment.
voyeur	Peeping	Jill called Jack a voyeur when she caught him aiming his binoculars at a bedroom window of the house next door.
vulnerable	susceptible to wounds	Achilles was vulnerable only in his heel.
vulpine	like a fox; crafty	She disliked his sly ways, but granted him a certain vulpine intelligence.
waffle	speak equivocally about an issue	When asked directly about the governor's involvement in the savings and loan scandal, the press secretary waffled, talking all around the issue.
waft	moved gently by wind or waves	Daydreaming, he gazed at the leaves that wafted past his window.
waggish	mischievous; humorous; tricky	He was a prankster who, unfortunately, often overlooked the damage he could cause with his waggish tricks.
waif	homeless child or animal	Although he already had eight cats, he could not resist adopting yet another feline waif.
waive	give up temporarily; yield	I will waive my rights in this matter in order to expedite our reaching a proper decision.
wallow	roll in; indulge in; become helpless	The hippopotamus loves to wallow in the mud.
wan	having a pale or sickly color; pallid	Suckling asked, "Why so pale and wan, fond lover?"
wane	grow gradually smaller	From now until December 21, the winter solstice, the hours of daylight will wane.
wangle	wiggle out; fake	She tried to wangle an invitation to the party.
wanton	unrestrained; willfully malicious; unchaste	Pointing to the stack of bills, Sheldon criticized Sarah for her wanton expenditures. In response, Sara accused Sheldon of making an unfounded, wanton attack.
warble	sing; babble	Every morning the birds warbled outside her window.
warrant	justify; authorize	Before the judge issues the injunction, you must convince her this action is warranted.
warranty	guarantee; assurance by seller	The purchaser of this automobile is protected by the manufacturer's warranty that he will replace any defective part for five years or 50,000 miles.
warren	tunnels in which rabbits live; crowded conditions in which people live	The tenement was a veritable warren, packed with people too poor to live elsewhere.
wary	very cautious	The spies grew wary as they approached the sentry.
wastrel	profligate	He was denounced as a wastrel who had dissipated his inheritance.
wax	increase; grow	With proper handling, his fortunes waxed and he became rich.
waylay	ambush; lie in wait	They agreed to waylay their victim as he passed through the dark alley going home.
wean	accustom a baby not to nurse; give up a cherished activity	He decided he would wean himself away from eating junk food and stick to fruits and vegetables.
weather	endure the effects of weather or other forces	He weathered the changes in his personal life with difficulty, as he had no one in whom to confide.
welt	mark from beating or whipping	The evidence of child abuse was very clear; Jennifer's small body was covered with welts and bruises.
welter	turmoil; bewildering jumble	The existing welter of overlapping federal and state proclaims cries out for immediate reform.
welter	wallow	At the height of the battle, the casualties were so numerous that the victims weltered in their blood while waiting for medical attention.
wheedle	cajole; coax; deceive by flattery	She knows she can wheedle almost anything she wants from her father.
whelp	young wolf, dog, tiger, etc	This collie whelp won't do for breeding, but he'd make a fine pet.
whet	sharpen; stimulate	The odors from the kitchen are whetting my appetite; I will be ravenous by the time the meal is served.
whiff	puff or gust (of air, scent, etc.); hint	The slightest whiff of Old Spice cologne brought memories of George to her mind.
whimsical	capricious; fanciful	He dismissed his generous gift to his college as a sentimental fancy, an old man's whimsical gesture.
whinny	neigh like a horse	 When he laughed through his nose, it sounded as if he whinnied.
whit	smallest speck	There is not a whit of intelligence or understanding in your observations.
whittle	pare; cut off bits	As a present for Aunt Polly, Tom whittled some clothespins out of a chunk of wood.
whorl	ring of leaves around stem; ring	Identification by fingerprints is based on the difference in shape and number of whorls on the fingers.
willful	intentional; headstrong	Donald had planned to kill his wife for months; clearly, her death was a case of deliberate, willful murder, not a crime of passion committed by a hasty, willful youth unable to foresee the consequences of his deeds.
wily	cunning; artful	She is as wily as a fox in avoiding trouble.
wince	shrink back; flinch	The screech of the chalk on the blackboard made her wince.
windfall	fallen fruit; unexpected lucky event	This huge tax refund is quite a windfall.
winnow	sift; separate good parts from bad	This test will winnow out the students who study from those who don't bother.
winsome	agreeable; gracious; engaging	By her winsome manner, she made herself liked by everyone who met her.
wispy	thin; slight; barely discernible	Worried about preserving his few wispy tufts of hair, Walter carefully massaged his scalp and applied hair restorer every night.
wistful	vaguely longing; sadly pensive	With a last wistful glance at the happy couples dancing in the hall, Sue headed back to her room to study for her exam.
withdrawn	introverted; remote	Rebuffed by his colleagues, the initially outgoing young researcher became increasingly withdrawn.
wither	shrivel; decay	Cut flowers are beautiful for a day, but all too soon they wither.
witless	foolish; idiotic	Such witless and fatuous statements will create the impression that you are an ignorant individual.
witticism	witty saying; facetious remark	What you regard as witticisms are often offensive to sensitive people.
wizardry	sorcery; magic	Merlin amazed the knights with his wizardry.
wizened	withered; shriveled	The wizened old man in the home for the aged was still active and energetic.
wont	custom; habitual procedure	As was his wont, he jogged two miles every morning before going to work.
worldly	engrossed in matters of this earth; not spiritual	You must leave your worldly goods behind you when you go to meet your Maker.
wrangle	quarrel; obtain through arguing; herd cattle	They wrangled over their inheritance.
wrath	anger; fury	She turned to him, full of wrath, and said, "What makes you think I'll accept lower pay for this job than you get?"
wreak	inflict	I am afraid he will wreak his vengeance on the innocent as well as the guilty.
wrench	pull; strain; twist	She wrenched free of her attacker and landed a powerful kick to his kneecap.
wrest	pull away; take by violence	With only ten seconds left to play, our team wrested victory from their grasp.
writ	written command issued by a court	The hero of Leonard's novel is a process server who invents unorthodox ways of serving writs on reluctant parties.
writhe	squirm, twist	He was writhing in pain, desperate for the drug his body required.
wry	twisted; with a humorous twist	We enjoy Dorothy Parker's verse for its wry wit.
xenophobia	fear or hatred of foreigners	When the refugee arrived in America, he was unprepared for the xenophobia he found there.
yen	longing; urge	She had a yen to get away and live on her own for a while.
yeoman	man owing small estate; middle-class farmer	It was not the aristocrat but the yeoman who determined the nation's policies.
yield	amount produced; crop; income on investment	An experienced farmer can estimate the annual yield of his acres with surprising accuracy.
yield	give in; surrender	The wounded knight refused to yield to his foe.
yoke	join together, unite	I don't wish to be yoked to him in marriage, as if we were cattle pulling a plow.
yokel	country bumpkin	At school, his classmates regarded him as a yokel and laughed at his rustic mannerisms.
yore	time past	He dreamed of the elegant homes of yore, but gave no thought to their inelegant plumbing.
zany	crazy; comic	I can watch the Marx brothers' zany antics for hours.
zeal	eager enthusiasm	Wang's zeal was contagious; soon all his fellow students were busily making posters, inspired by his ardent enthusiasm for the cause.
zealot	fanatic; person who shows excessive zeal	It is good to have a few zealots in our group for their enthusiasm is contagious.
zenith	point directly overhead in the sky; summit	When the sun was at its zenith, the glare was not as strong as at sunrise and sunset.
zephyr	gentle breeze; west wind	When these zephyrs blow, it is good to be in an open boat under a full sail.
